The Adventure of the Red Circle


By

Sir Arthur Conan Doyle



"Well, Mrs. Warren, I cannot see that you have any particular cause for
uneasiness, nor do I understand why I, whose time is of some value,
should interfere in the matter.  I really have other things to engage
me."  So spoke Sherlock Holmes and turned back to the great scrapbook
in which he was arranging and indexing some of his recent material.

But the landlady had the pertinacity and also the cunning of her sex.
She held her ground firmly.

"You arranged an affair for a lodger of mine last year," she said--"Mr.
Fairdale Hobbs."

"Ah, yes--a simple matter."

"But he would never cease talking of it--your kindness, sir, and the
way in which you brought light into the darkness.  I remembered his
words when I was in doubt and darkness myself.  I know you could if you
only would."

Holmes was accessible upon the side of flattery, and also, to do him
justice, upon the side of kindliness.  The two forces made him lay down
his gum-brush with a sigh of resignation and push back his chair.

"Well, well, Mrs. Warren, let us hear about it, then.  You don't object
to tobacco, I take it?  Thank you, Watson--the matches! You are uneasy,
as I understand, because your new lodger remains in his rooms and you
cannot see him.  Why, bless you, Mrs. Warren, if I were your lodger you
often would not see me for weeks on end."

"No doubt, sir; but this is different.  It frightens me, Mr. Holmes.  I
can't sleep for fright.  To hear his quick step moving here and moving
there from early morning to late at night, and yet never to catch so
much as a glimpse of him--it's more than I can stand.  My husband is as
nervous over it as I am, but he is out at his work all day, while I get
no rest from it.  What is he hiding for?  What has he done?  Except for
the girl, I am all alone in the house with him, and it's more than my
nerves can stand."

Holmes leaned forward and laid his long, thin fingers upon the woman's
shoulder.  He had an almost hypnotic power of soothing when he wished.
The scared look faded from her eyes, and her agitated features smoothed
into their usual commonplace.  She sat down in the chair which he had
indicated.

"If I take it up I must understand every detail," said he.  "Take time
to consider.  The smallest point may be the most essential. You say
that the man came ten days ago and paid you for a fortnight's board and
lodging?"

"He asked my terms, sir.  I said fifty shillings a week.  There is a
small sitting-room and bedroom, and all complete, at the top of the
house."

"Well?"

"He said, 'I'll pay you five pounds a week if I can have it on my own
terms.'  I'm a poor woman, sir, and Mr. Warren earns little, and the
money meant much to me.  He took out a ten-pound note, and he held it
out to me then and there.  'You can have the same every fortnight for a
long time to come if you keep the terms,' he said.  'If not, I'll have
no more to do with you.'

"What were the terms?"

"Well, sir, they were that he was to have a key of the house. That was
all right.  Lodgers often have them.  Also, that he was to be left
entirely to himself and never, upon any excuse, to be disturbed."

"Nothing wonderful in that, surely?"

"Not in reason, sir.  But this is out of all reason.  He has been there
for ten days, and neither Mr. Warren, nor I, nor the girl has once set
eyes upon him.  We can hear that quick step of his pacing up and down,
up and down, night, morning, and noon; but except on that first night
he had never once gone out of the house."

"Oh, he went out the first night, did he?"

"Yes, sir, and returned very late--after we were all in bed.  He told
me after he had taken the rooms that he would do so and asked me not to
bar the door.  I heard him come up the stair after midnight."

"But his meals?"

"It was his particular direction that we should always, when he rang,
leave his meal upon a chair, outside his door.  Then he rings again
when he has finished, and we take it down from the same chair.  If he
wants anything else he prints it on a slip of paper and leaves it."

"Prints it?"

"Yes, sir; prints it in pencil.  Just the word, nothing more. Here's
the one I brought to show you--soap.  Here's another--match. This is
one he left the first morning--daily gazette.  I leave that paper with
his breakfast every morning."

"Dear me, Watson," said Homes, staring with great curiosity at the
slips of foolscap which the landlady had handed to him, "this is
certainly a little unusual.  Seclusion I can understand; but why print?
Printing is a clumsy process.  Why not write?  What would it suggest,
Watson?"

"That he desired to conceal his handwriting."

"But why?  What can it matter to him that his landlady should have a
word of his writing?  Still, it may be as you say.  Then, again, why
such laconic messages?"

"I cannot imagine."

"It opens a pleasing field for intelligent speculation.  The words are
written with a broad-pointed, violet-tinted pencil of a not unusual
pattern.  You will observe that the paper is torn away at the side here
after the printing was done, so that the 's' of 'soap' is partly gone.
Suggestive, Watson, is it not?"

"Of caution?"

"Exactly.  There was evidently some mark, some thumbprint, something
which might give a clue to the person's identity.  Now. Mrs. Warren,
you say that the man was of middle size, dark, and bearded.  What age
would he be?"

"Youngish, sir--not over thirty."

"Well, can you give me no further indications?"

"He spoke good English, sir, and yet I thought he was a foreigner by
his accent."

"And he was well dressed?"

"Very smartly dressed, sir--quite the gentleman.  Dark clothes--nothing
you would note."

"He gave no name?"

"No, sir."

"And has had no letters or callers?"

"None."

"But surely you or the girl enter his room of a morning?"

"No, sir; he looks after himself entirely."

"Dear me! that is certainly remarkable.  What about his luggage?"

"He had one big brown bag with him--nothing else."

"Well, we don't seem to have much material to help us.  Do you say
nothing has come out of that room--absolutely nothing?"

The landlady drew an envelope from her bag; from it she shook out two
burnt matches and a cigarette-end upon the table.

"They were on his tray this morning.  I brought them because I had
heard that you can read great things out of small ones."

Holmes shrugged his shoulders.

"There is nothing here," said he.  "The matches have, of course, been
used to light cigarettes.  That is obvious from the shortness of the
burnt end.  Half the match is consumed in lighting a pipe or cigar.
But, dear me! this cigarette stub is certainly remarkable.  The
gentleman was bearded and moustached, you say?"

"Yes, sir."

"I don't understand that.  I should say that only a clean-shaven man
could have smoked this.  Why, Watson, even your modest moustache would
have been singed."

"A holder?" I suggested.

"No, no; the end is matted.  I suppose there could not be two people in
your rooms, Mrs. Warren?"

"No, sir.  He eats so little that I often wonder it can keep life in
one."

"Well, I think we must wait for a little more material.  After all, you
have nothing to complain of.  You have received your rent, and he is
not a troublesome lodger, though he is certainly an unusual one.  He
pays you well, and if he chooses to lie concealed it is no direct
business of yours.  We have no excuse for an intrusion upon his privacy
until we have some reason to think that there is a guilty reason for
it.  I've taken up the matter, and I won't lose sight of it.  Report to
me if anything fresh occurs, and rely upon my assistance if it should
be needed.

"There are certainly some points of interest in this case, Watson," he
remarked when the landlady had left us.  "It may, of course, be
trivial--individual eccentricity; or it may be very much deeper than
appears on the surface.  The first thing that strikes one is the obvious
possibility that the person now in the rooms may be entirely different
from the one who engaged them."

"Why should you think so?"

"Well, apart from this cigarette-end, was it not suggestive that the
only time the lodger went out was immediately after his taking the
rooms?  He came back--or someone came back--when all witnesses were out
of the way.  We have no proof that the person who came back was the
person who went out.  Then, again, the man who took the rooms spoke
English well.  This other, however, prints 'match' when it should have
been 'matches.'  I can imagine that the word was taken out of a
dictionary, which would give the noun but not the plural.  The laconic
style may be to conceal the absence of knowledge of English.  Yes,
Watson, there are good reasons to suspect that there has been a
substitution of lodgers."

"But for what possible end?"

"Ah! there lies our problem.  There is one rather obvious line of
investigation."  He took down the great book in which, day by day, he
filed the agony columns of the various London journals. "Dear me!" said
he, turning over the pages, "what a chorus of groans, cries, and
bleatings!  What a rag-bag of singular happenings!  But surely the most
valuable hunting-ground that ever was given to a student of the
unusual!  This person is alone and cannot be approached by letter
without a breach of that absolute secrecy which is desired.  How is any
news or any message to reach him from without?  Obviously by
advertisement through a newspaper.  There seems no other way, and
fortunately we need concern ourselves with the one paper only.  Here
are the Daily Gazette extracts of the last fortnight.  'Lady with a
black boa at Prince's Skating Club'--that we may pass.  'Surely Jimmy
will not break his mother's heart'--that appears to be irrelevant.  'If
the lady who fainted on Brixton bus'--she does not interest me.  'Every
day my heart longs--' Bleat, Watson--unmitigated bleat!  Ah, this is a
little more possible.  Listen to this:  'Be patient.  Will find some
sure means of communications.  Meanwhile, this column.  G.'  That is
two days after Mrs. Warren's lodger arrived.  It sounds plausible, does
it not?  The mysterious one could understand English, even if he could
not print it.  Let us see if we can pick up the trace again.  Yes, here
we are--three days later.  'Am making successful arrangements.
Patience and prudence.  The clouds will pass.  G.'  Nothing for a week
after that.  Then comes something much more definite:  'The path is
clearing.  If I find chance signal message remember code agreed--One A,
two B, and so on. You will hear soon.  G.'  That was in yesterday's
paper, and there is nothing in to-day's. It's all very appropriate to
Mrs. Warren's lodger.  If we wait a little, Watson, I don't doubt that
the affair will grow more intelligible."

So it proved; for in the morning I found my friend standing on the
hearthrug with his back to the fire and a smile of complete
satisfaction upon his face.

"How's this, Watson?" he cried, picking up the paper from the table.
"'High red house with white stone facings.  Third floor. Second window
left.  After dusk.  G.'  That is definite enough. I think after
breakfast we must make a little reconnaissance of Mrs. Warren's
neighbourhood.  Ah, Mrs. Warren! what news do you bring us this
morning?"

Our client had suddenly burst into the room with an explosive energy
which told of some new and momentous development.

"It's a police matter, Mr. Holmes!" she cried.  "I'll have no more of
it!  He shall pack out of there with his baggage.  I would have gone
straight up and told him so, only I thought it was but fair to you to
take your opinion first.  But I'm at the end of my patience, and when
it comes to knocking my old man about--"

"Knocking Mr. Warren about?"

"Using him roughly, anyway."

"But who used him roughly?"

"Ah! that's what we want to know!  It was this morning, sir.  Mr.
Warren is a timekeeper at Morton and Waylight's, in Tottenham Court
Road.  He has to be out of the house before seven. Well, this morning
he had not gone ten paces down the road when two men came up behind
him, threw a coat over his head, and bundled him into a cab that was
beside the curb.  They drove him an hour, and then opened the door and
shot him out.  He lay in the roadway so shaken in his wits that he
never saw what became of the cab. When he picked himself up he found he
was on Hampstead Heath; so he took a bus home, and there he lies now on
his sofa, while I came straight round to tell you what had happened."

"Most interesting," said Holmes.  "Did he observe the appearance of
these men--did he hear them talk?"

"No; he is clean dazed.  He just knows that he was lifted up as if by
magic and dropped as if by magic. Two at least were in it, and maybe
three."

"And you connect this attack with your lodger?"

"Well, we've lived there fifteen years and no such happenings ever came
before.  I've had enough of him.  Money's not everything. I'll have him
out of my house before the day is done."

"Wait a bit, Mrs. Warren.  Do nothing rash. I begin to think that this
affair may be very much more important than appeared at first sight.
It is clear now that some danger is threatening your lodger.  It is
equally clear that his enemies, lying in wait for him near your door,
mistook your husband for him in the foggy morning light.  On
discovering their mistake they released him. What they would have done
had it not been a mistake, we can only conjecture."

"Well, what am I to do, Mr. Holmes?"

"I have a great fancy to see this lodger of yours, Mrs. Warren."

"I don't see how that is to be managed, unless you break in the door.
I always hear him unlock it as I go down the stair after I leave the
tray."

"He has to take the tray in.  Surely we could conceal ourselves and see
him do it."

The landlady thought for a moment.

"Well, sir, there's the box-room opposite.  I could arrange a
looking-glass, maybe, and if you were behind the door--"

"Excellent!" said Holmes.  "When does he lunch?"

"About one, sir."

"Then Dr. Watson and I will come round in time.  For the present, Mrs.
Warren, good-bye."

At half-past twelve we found ourselves upon the steps of Mrs. Warren's
house--a high, thin, yellow-brick edifice in Great Orme Street, a
narrow thoroughfare at the northeast side of the British Museum.
Standing as it does near the corner of the street,  it commands a view
down Howe Street, with its more pretentious houses.  Holmes pointed with
a chuckle to one of these, a row of residential flats, which projected
so that they could not fail to catch the eye.

"See, Watson!" said he.  "'High red house with stone facings.' There is
the signal station all right.  We know the place, and we know the code;
so surely our task should be simple.  There's a 'to let' card in that
window.  It is evidently an empty flat to which the confederate has
access.  Well, Mrs. Warren, what now?"

"I have it all ready for you.  If you will both come up and leave your
boots below on the landing, I'll put you there now."

It was an excellent hiding-place which she had arranged.  The mirror
was so placed that, seated in the dark, we could very plainly see the
door opposite.  We had hardly settled down in it, and Mrs. Warren left
us, when a distant tinkle announced that our mysterious neighbour had
rung.  Presently the landlady appeared with the tray, laid it down upon
a chair beside the closed door, and then, treading heavily, departed.
Crouching together in the angle of the door, we kept our eyes fixed
upon the mirror. Suddenly, as the landlady's footsteps died away, there
was the creak of a turning key, the handle revolved, and two thin hands
darted out and lifted the tray from the chair.  An instant later it was
hurriedly replaced, and I caught a glimpse of a dark, beautiful,
horrified face glaring at the narrow opening of the box-room.  Then the
door crashed to, the key turned once more, and all was silence. Holmes
twitched my sleeve, and together we stole down the stair.

"I will call again in the evening," said he to the expectant landlady.
"I think, Watson, we can discuss this business better in our own
quarters."

"My surmise, as you saw, proved to be correct," said he, speaking from
the depths of his easy-chair.  "There has been a substitution of
lodgers.  What I did not foresee is that we should find a woman, and no
ordinary woman, Watson."

"She saw us."

"Well, she saw something to alarm her.  That is certain.  The general
sequence of events is pretty clear, is it not?  A couple seek refuge in
London from a very terrible and instant danger. The measure of that
danger is the rigour of their precautions. The man, who has some work
which he must do, desires to leave the woman in absolute safety while
he does it.  It is not an easy problem, but he solved it in an original
fashion, and so effectively that her presence was not even known to the
landlady who supplies her with food.  The printed messages, as is now
evident, were to prevent her sex being discovered by her writing. The
man cannot come near the woman, or he will guide their enemies to her.
Since he cannot communicate with her direct, he has recourse to the
agony column of a paper.  So far all is clear."

"But what is at the root of it?"

"Ah, yes, Watson--severely practical, as usual!  What is at the root of
it all?  Mrs. Warren's whimsical problem enlarges somewhat and assumes
a more sinister aspect as we proceed.  This much we can say:  that it
is no ordinary love escapade.  You saw the woman's face at the sign of
danger.  We have heard, too, of the attack upon the landlord, which was
undoubtedly meant for the lodger.  These alarms, and the desperate need
for secrecy, argue that the matter is one of life or death.  The attack
upon Mr. Warren further shows that the enemy, whoever they are, are
themselves not aware of the substitution of the female lodger for the
male.  It is very curious and complex, Watson."

"Why should you go further in it?  What have you to gain from it?"

"What, indeed?  It is art for art's sake, Watson.  I suppose when you
doctored you found yourself studying cases without thought of a fee?"

"For my education, Holmes."

"Education never ends, Watson.  It is a series of lessons with the
greatest for the last.  This is an instructive case.  There is neither
money nor credit in it, and yet one would wish to tidy it up.  When
dusk comes we should find ourselves one stage advanced in our
investigation."

When we returned to Mrs. Warren's rooms, the gloom of a London winter
evening had thickened into one gray curtain, a dead monotone of colour,
broken only by the sharp yellow squares of the windows and the blurred
haloes of the gas-lamps.  As we peered from the darkened sitting-room
of the lodging-house, one more dim light glimmered high up through the
obscurity.

"Someone is moving in that room," said Holmes in a whisper, his gaunt
and eager face thrust forward to the window-pane.  "Yes, I can see his
shadow.  There he is again!  He has a candle in his hand.  Now he is
peering across.  He wants to be sure that she is on the lookout.  Now
he begins to flash.  Take the message also, Watson, that we may check
each other.  A single flash--that is A, surely.  Now, then.  How many
did you make it?  Twenty.  So did I.  That should mean T.  AT--that's
intelligible enough. Another T.  Surely this is the beginning of a
second word.  Now, then--TENTA. Dead stop.  That can't be all, Watson?
ATTENTA gives no sense.  Nor is it any better as three words AT, TEN,
TA, unless T. A. are a person's initials.  There it goes again! What's
that?  ATTE--why, it is the same message over again. Curious, Watson,
very curious.  Now he is off once more!  AT--why he is repeating it for
the third time.  ATTENTA three times!  How often will he repeat it?
No, that seems to be the finish.  He has withdrawn from the window.
What do you make of it, Watson?"

"A cipher message, Holmes."

My companion gave a sudden chuckle of comprehension.  "And not a very
obscure cipher, Watson," said he.  "Why, of course, it is Italian!  The
A means that it is addressed to a woman.  'Beware! Beware!  Beware!'
How's that, Watson?

"I believe you have hit it."

"Not a doubt of it.  It is a very urgent message, thrice repeated to
make it more so.  But beware of what?  Wait a bit, he is coming to the
window once more."

Again we saw the dim silhouette of a crouching man and the whisk of the
small flame across the window as the signals were renewed. They came
more rapidly than before--so rapid that it was hard to follow them.

"PERICOLO--pericolo--eh, what's that, Watson?  'Danger,' isn't it?
Yes, by Jove, it's a danger signal.  There he goes again! PERI.
Halloa, what on earth--"

The light had suddenly gone out, the glimmering square of window had
disappeared, and the third floor formed a dark band round the lofty
building, with its tiers of shining casements.  That last warning cry
had been suddenly cut short.  How, and by whom?  The same thought
occurred on the instant to us both.  Holmes sprang up from where he
crouched by the window.

"This is serious, Watson," he cried.  "There is some devilry going
forward!  Why should such a message stop in such a way?  I should put
Scotland Yard in touch with this business--and yet, it is too pressing
for us to leave."

"Shall I go for the police?"

"We must define the situation a little more clearly.  It may bear some
more innocent interpretation.  Come, Watson, let us go across ourselves
and see what we can make of it."




Two



As we walked rapidly down Howe Street I glanced back at the building
which we had left.  There, dimly outlined at the top window, I could
see the shadow of a head, a woman's head, gazing tensely, rigidly, out
into the night, waiting with breathless suspense for the renewal of
that interrupted message.  At the doorway of the Howe Street flats a
man, muffled in a cravat and greatcoat, was leaning against the
railing.  He started as the hall-light fell upon our faces.

"Holmes!" he cried.

"Why, Gregson!" said my companion as he shook hands with the Scotland
Yard detective.  "Journeys end with lovers' meetings. What brings you
here?"

"The same reasons that bring you, I expect," said Gregson.  "How you
got on to it I can't imagine."

"Different threads, but leading up to the same tangle.  I've been
taking the signals."

"Signals?"

"Yes, from that window.  They broke off in the middle.  We came over to
see the reason.  But since it is safe in your hands I see no object in
continuing this business."

"Wait a bit!" cried Gregson eagerly.  "I'll do you this justice, Mr.
Holmes, that I was never in a case yet that I didn't feel stronger for
having you on my side.  There's only the one exit to these flats, so we
have him safe."

"Who is he?"

"Well, well, we score over you for once, Mr. Holmes.  You must give us
best this time."  He struck his stick sharply upon the ground, on which
a cabman, his whip in his hand, sauntered over from a four-wheeler
which stood on the far side of the street. "May I introduce you to Mr.
Sherlock Holmes?" he said to the cabman.  "This is Mr. Leverton, of
Pinkerton's American Agency."

"The hero of the Long Island cave mystery?" said Holmes.  "Sir, I am
pleased to meet you."

The American, a quiet, businesslike young man, with a clean-shaven,
hatchet face, flushed up at the words of commendation. "I am on the
trail of my life now, Mr. Holmes," said he.  "If I can get Gorgiano--"

"What!  Gorgiano of the Red Circle?"

"Oh, he has a European fame, has he?  Well, we've learned all about him
in America.  We KNOW he is at the bottom of fifty murders, and yet we
have nothing positive we can take him on.  I tracked him over from New
York, and I've been close to him for a week in London, waiting some
excuse to get my hand on his collar. Mr. Gregson and I ran him to
ground in that big tenement house, and there's only one door, so he
can't slip us.  There's three folk come out since he went in, but I'll
swear he wasn't one of them."

"Mr. Holmes talks of signals," said Gregson.  "I expect, as usual, he
knows a good deal that we don't."

In a few clear words Holmes explained the situation as it had appeared
to us.  The American struck his hands together with vexation.

"He's on to us!" he cried.

"Why do you think so?"

"Well, it figures out that way, does it not?  Here he is, sending out
messages to an accomplice--there are several of his gang in London.
Then suddenly, just as by your own account he was telling them that
there was danger, he broke short off.  What could it mean except that
from the window he had suddenly either caught sight of us in the
street, or in some way come to understand how close the danger was, and
that he must act right away if he was to avoid it?  What do you
suggest, Mr. Holmes?"

"That we go up at once and see for ourselves."

"But we have no warrant for his arrest."

"He is in unoccupied premises under suspicious circumstances," said
Gregson.  "That is good enough for the moment.  When we have him by the
heels we can see if New York can't help us to keep him.  I'll take the
responsibility of arresting him now."

Our official detectives may blunder in the matter of intelligence, but
never in that of courage.  Gregson climbed the stair to arrest this
desperate murderer with the same absolutely quiet and businesslike
bearing with which he would have ascended the official staircase of
Scotland Yard.  The Pinkerton man had tried to push past him, but
Gregson had firmly elbowed him back. London dangers were the privilege
of the London force.

The door of the left-hand flat upon the third landing was standing
ajar.  Gregson pushed it open.  Within all was absolute silence and
darkness.  I struck a match and lit the detective's lantern.  As I did
so, and as the flicker steadied into a flame, we all gave a gasp of
surprise.  On the deal boards of the carpetless floor there was
outlined a fresh track of blood.  The red steps pointed towards us and
led away from an inner room, the door of which was closed.  Gregson
flung it open and held his light full blaze in front of him, while we
all peered eagerly over his shoulders.

In the middle of the floor of the empty room was huddled the figure of
an enormous man, his clean-shaven, swarthy face grotesquely horrible in
its contortion and his head encircled by a ghastly crimson halo of
blood, lying in a broad wet circle upon the white woodwork.  His knees
were drawn up, his hands thrown out in agony, and from the centre of
his broad, brown, upturned throat there projected the white haft of a
knife driven blade-deep into his body.  Giant as he was, the man must
have gone down like a pole-axed ox before that terrific blow.  Beside
his right hand a most formidable horn-handled, two-edged dagger lay
upon the floor, and near it a black kid glove.

"By George! it's Black Gorgiano himself!" cried the American detective.
"Someone has got ahead of us this time."

"Here is the candle in the window, Mr. Holmes," said Gregson. "Why,
whatever are you doing?"

Holmes had stepped across, had lit the candle, and was passing it
backward and forward across the window-panes.  Then he peered into the
darkness, blew the candle out, and threw it on the floor.

"I rather think that will be helpful," said he.  He came over and stood
in deep thought while the two professionals were examining the body.
"You say that three people came out from the flat while you were
waiting downstairs," said he at last.  "Did you observe them closely?"

"Yes, I did."

"Was there a fellow about thirty, black-bearded, dark, of middle size?"

"Yes; he was the last to pass me."

"That is your man, I fancy.  I can give you his description, and we
have a very excellent outline of his footmark.  That should be enough
for you."

"Not much, Mr. Holmes, among the millions of London."

"Perhaps not. That is why I thought it best to summon this lady to your
aid."

We all turned round at the words.  There, framed in the doorway, was a
tall and beautiful woman--the mysterious lodger of Bloomsbury.  Slowly
she advanced, her face pale and drawn with a frightful apprehension,
her eyes fixed and staring, her terrified gaze riveted upon the dark
figure on the floor.

"You have killed him!" she muttered.  "Oh, Dio mio, you have killed
him!"  Then I heard a sudden sharp intake of her breath, and she sprang
into the air with a cry of joy.  Round and round the room she danced,
her hands clapping, her dark eyes gleaming with delighted wonder, and a
thousand pretty Italian exclamations pouring from her lips.  It was
terrible and amazing to see such a woman so convulsed with joy at such
a sight.  Suddenly she stopped and gazed at us all with a questioning
stare.

"But you!  You are police, are you not?  You have killed Giuseppe
Gorgiano.  Is it not so?"

"We are police, madam."

She looked round into the shadows of the room.

"But where, then, is Gennaro?" she asked.  "He is my husband, Gennaro
Lucca.  I am Emilia Lucca, and we are both from New York. Where is
Gennaro?  He called me this moment from this window, and I ran with all
my speed."

"It was I who called," said Holmes.

"You!  How could you call?"

"Your cipher was not difficult, madam.  Your presence here was
desirable. I knew that I had only to flash 'Vieni' and you would surely
come."

The beautiful Italian looked with awe at my companion.

"I do not understand how you know these things," she said. "Giuseppe
Gorgiano--how did he--"  She paused, and then suddenly her face lit up
with pride and delight.  "Now I see it!  My Gennaro!  My splendid,
beautiful Gennaro, who has guarded me safe from all harm, he did it,
with his own strong hand he killed the monster!  Oh, Gennaro, how
wonderful you are!  What woman could ever be worthy of such a man?"

"Well, Mrs. Lucca," said the prosaic Gregson, laying his hand upon the
lady's sleeve with as little sentiment as if she were a Notting Hill
hooligan, "I am not very clear yet who you are or what you are; but
you've said enough to make it very clear that we shall want you at the
Yard."

"One moment, Gregson," said Holmes.  "I rather fancy that this lady may
be as anxious to give us information as we can be to get it.  You
understand, madam, that your husband will be arrested and tried for the
death of the man who lies before us?  What you say may be used in
evidence.  But if you think that he has acted from motives which are
not criminal, and which he would wish to have known, then you cannot
serve him better than by telling us the whole story."

"Now that Gorgiano is dead we fear nothing," said the lady.  "He was a
devil and a monster, and there can be no judge in the world who would
punish my husband for having killed him."

"In that case," said Holmes, "my suggestion is that we lock this door,
leave things as we found them, go with this lady to her room, and form
our opinion after we have heard what it is that she has to say to us."

Half an hour later we were seated, all four, in the small sitting-room
of Signora Lucca, listening to her remarkable narrative of those
sinister events, the ending of which we had chanced to witness.  She
spoke in rapid and fluent but very unconventional English, which, for
the sake of clearness, I will make grammatical.

"I was born in Posilippo, near Naples," said she, "and was the daughter
of Augusto Barelli, who was the chief lawyer and once the deputy of
that part.  Gennaro was in my father's employment, and I came to love
him, as any woman must.  He had neither money nor position--nothing but
his beauty and strength and energy--so my father forbade the match.  We
fled together, were married at Bari, and sold my jewels to gain the
money which would take us to America.  This was four years ago, and we
have been in New York ever since.

"Fortune was very good to us at first.  Gennaro was able to do a
service to an Italian gentleman--he saved him from some ruffians in the
place called the Bowery, and so made a powerful friend. His name was
Tito Castalotte, and he was the senior partner of the great firm of
Castalotte and Zamba, who are the chief fruit importers of New York.
Signor Zamba is an invalid, and our new friend Castalotte has all power
within the firm, which employs more than three hundred men.  He took my
husband into his employment, made him head of a department, and showed
his good-will towards him in every way.  Signor Castalotte was a
bachelor, and I believe that he felt as if Gennaro was his son, and
both my husband and I loved him as if he were our father.  We had taken
and furnished a little house in Brooklyn, and our whole future seemed
assured when that black cloud appeared which was soon to overspread our
sky.

"One night, when Gennaro returned from his work, he brought a
fellow-countryman back with him.  His name was Gorgiano, and he had
come also from Posilippo.  He was a huge man, as you can testify, for
you have looked upon his corpse.  Not only was his body that of a giant
but everything about him was grotesque, gigantic, and terrifying.  His
voice was like thunder in our little house.  There was scarce room for
the whirl of his great arms as he talked.  His thoughts, his emotions,
his passions, all were exaggerated and monstrous.  He talked, or rather
roared, with such energy that others could but sit and listen, cowed
with the mighty stream of words.  His eyes blazed at you and held you
at his mercy.  He was a terrible and wonderful man.  I thank God that
he is dead!

"He came again and again.  Yet I was aware that Gennaro was no more
happy than I was in his presence.  My poor husband would sit pale and
listless, listening to the endless raving upon politics and upon social
questions which made up our visitor's conversation.  Gennaro said
nothing, but I, who knew him so well, could read in his face some
emotion which I had never seen there before.  At first I thought that
it was dislike.  And then, gradually, I understood that it was more
than dislike.  It was fear--a deep, secret, shrinking fear.  That
night--the night that I read his terror--I put my arms round him and I
implored him by his love for me and by all that he held dear to hold
nothing from me, and to tell me why this huge man overshadowed him so.

"He told me, and my own heart grew cold as ice as I listened.  My poor
Gennaro, in his wild and fiery days, when all the world seemed against
him and his mind was driven half mad by the injustices of life, had
joined a Neapolitan society, the Red Circle, which was allied to the
old Carbonari.  The oaths and secrets of this brotherhood were
frightful, but once within its rule no escape was possible.  When we
had fled to America Gennaro thought that he had cast it all off
forever. What was his horror one evening to meet in the streets the
very man who had initiated him in Naples, the giant Gorgiano, a man who
had earned the name of 'Death' in the south of Italy, for he was red to
the elbow in murder!  He had come to New York to avoid the Italian
police, and he had already planted a branch of this dreadful society in
his new home.  All this Gennaro told me and showed me a summons which
he had received that very day, a Red Circle drawn upon the head of it
telling him that a lodge would be held upon a certain date, and that
his presence at it was required and ordered.

"That was bad enough, but worse was to come.  I had noticed for some
time that when Gorgiano came to us, as he constantly did, in the
evening, he spoke much to me; and even when his words were to my
husband those terrible, glaring, wild-beast eyes of his were always
turned upon me.  One night his secret came out.  I had awakened what he
called 'love' within him--the love of a brute--a savage.  Gennaro had
not yet returned when he came.  He pushed his way in, seized me in his
mighty arms, hugged me in his bear's embrace, covered me with kisses,
and implored me to come away with him.  I was struggling and screaming
when Gennaro entered and attacked him.  He struck Gennaro senseless and
fled from the house which he was never more to enter.  It was a deadly
enemy that we made that night.

"A few days later came the meeting.  Gennaro returned from it with a
face which told me that something dreadful had occurred. It was worse
than we could have imagined possible.  The funds of the society were
raised by blackmailing rich Italians and threatening them with violence
should they refuse the money. It seems that Castalotte, our dear friend
and benefactor, had been approached.  He had refused to yield to
threats, and he had handed the notices to the police.  It was resolved
now that such an example should be made of them as would prevent any
other victim from rebelling. At the meeting it was arranged that he and
his house should be blown up with dynamite.  There was a drawing of
lots as to who should carry out the deed.  Gennaro saw our enemy's
cruel face smiling at him as he dipped his hand in the bag. No doubt it
had been prearranged in some fashion, for it was the fatal disc with
the Red Circle upon it, the mandate for murder, which lay upon his
palm.  He was to kill his best friend, or he was to expose himself and
me to the vengeance of his comrades.  It was part of their fiendish
system to punish those whom they feared or hated by injuring not only
their own persons but those whom they loved, and it was the knowledge
of this which hung as a terror over my poor Gennaro's head and drove
him nearly crazy with apprehension.

"All that night we sat together, our arms round each other, each
strengthening each for the troubles that lay before us.  The very next
evening had been fixed for the attempt.  By midday my husband and I
were on our way to London, but not before he had given our benefactor
full warning of this danger, and had also left such information for the
police as would safeguard his life for the future.

"The rest, gentlemen, you know for yourselves.  We were sure that our
enemies would be behind us like our own shadows.  Gorgiano had his
private reasons for vengeance, but in any case we knew how ruthless,
cunning, and untiring he could be.  Both Italy and America are full of
stories of his dreadful powers.  If ever they were exerted it would be
now.  My darling made use of the few clear days which our start had
given us in arranging for a refuge for me in such a fashion that no
possible danger could reach me. For his own part, he wished to be free
that he might communicate both with the American and with the Italian
police.  I do not myself know where he lived, or how.  All that I
learned was through the columns of a newspaper.  But once as I looked
through my window, I saw two Italians watching the house, and I
understood that in some way Gorgiano had found our retreat. Finally
Gennaro told me, through the paper, that he would signal to me from a
certain window, but when the signals came they were nothing but
warnings, which were suddenly interrupted.  It is very clear to me now
that he knew Gorgiano to be close upon him, and that, thank God! he was
ready for him when he came.  And now, gentleman, I would ask you
whether we have anything to fear from the law, or whether any judge
upon earth would condemn my Gennaro for what he has done?"

"Well, Mr. Gregson," said the American, looking across at the official,
"I don't know what your British point of view may be, but I guess that
in New York this lady's husband will receive a pretty general vote of
thanks."

"She will have to come with me and see the chief," Gregson answered.
"If what she says is corroborated, I do not think she or her husband
has much to fear.  But what I can't make head or tail of, Mr. Holmes,
is how on earth YOU got yourself mixed up in the matter."

"Education, Gregson, education.  Still seeking knowledge at the old
university.  Well, Watson, you have one more specimen of the tragic and
grotesque to add to your collection.  By the way, it is not eight
o'clock, and a Wagner night at Covent Garden!  If we hurry, we might be
in time for the second act."

A STUDY IN SCARLET.




PART I.


(_Being a reprint from the Reminiscences of_ JOHN H. WATSON, M.D.,
_Late of the Army Medical Department._)




CHAPTER I.
MR. SHERLOCK HOLMES.


In the year 1878 I took my degree of Doctor of Medicine of the
University of London, and proceeded to Netley to go through the course
prescribed for surgeons in the army. Having completed my studies there,
I was duly attached to the Fifth Northumberland Fusiliers as Assistant
Surgeon. The regiment was stationed in India at the time, and before I
could join it, the second Afghan war had broken out. On landing at
Bombay, I learned that my corps had advanced through the passes, and
was already deep in the enemy’s country. I followed, however, with many
other officers who were in the same situation as myself, and succeeded
in reaching Candahar in safety, where I found my regiment, and at once
entered upon my new duties.

The campaign brought honours and promotion to many, but for me it had
nothing but misfortune and disaster. I was removed from my brigade and
attached to the Berkshires, with whom I served at the fatal battle of
Maiwand. There I was struck on the shoulder by a Jezail bullet, which
shattered the bone and grazed the subclavian artery. I should have
fallen into the hands of the murderous Ghazis had it not been for the
devotion and courage shown by Murray, my orderly, who threw me across a
pack-horse, and succeeded in bringing me safely to the British lines.

Worn with pain, and weak from the prolonged hardships which I had
undergone, I was removed, with a great train of wounded sufferers, to
the base hospital at Peshawar. Here I rallied, and had already improved
so far as to be able to walk about the wards, and even to bask a little
upon the verandah, when I was struck down by enteric fever, that curse
of our Indian possessions. For months my life was despaired of, and
when at last I came to myself and became convalescent, I was so weak
and emaciated that a medical board determined that not a day should be
lost in sending me back to England. I was dispatched, accordingly, in
the troopship “Orontes,” and landed a month later on Portsmouth jetty,
with my health irretrievably ruined, but with permission from a
paternal government to spend the next nine months in attempting to
improve it.

I had neither kith nor kin in England, and was therefore as free as
air—or as free as an income of eleven shillings and sixpence a day will
permit a man to be. Under such circumstances, I naturally gravitated to
London, that great cesspool into which all the loungers and idlers of
the Empire are irresistibly drained. There I stayed for some time at a
private hotel in the Strand, leading a comfortless, meaningless
existence, and spending such money as I had, considerably more freely
than I ought. So alarming did the state of my finances become, that I
soon realized that I must either leave the metropolis and rusticate
somewhere in the country, or that I must make a complete alteration in
my style of living. Choosing the latter alternative, I began by making
up my mind to leave the hotel, and to take up my quarters in some less
pretentious and less expensive domicile.

On the very day that I had come to this conclusion, I was standing at
the Criterion Bar, when some one tapped me on the shoulder, and turning
round I recognized young Stamford, who had been a dresser under me at
Barts. The sight of a friendly face in the great wilderness of London
is a pleasant thing indeed to a lonely man. In old days Stamford had
never been a particular crony of mine, but now I hailed him with
enthusiasm, and he, in his turn, appeared to be delighted to see me. In
the exuberance of my joy, I asked him to lunch with me at the Holborn,
and we started off together in a hansom.

“Whatever have you been doing with yourself, Watson?” he asked in
undisguised wonder, as we rattled through the crowded London streets.
“You are as thin as a lath and as brown as a nut.”

I gave him a short sketch of my adventures, and had hardly concluded it
by the time that we reached our destination.

“Poor devil!” he said, commiseratingly, after he had listened to my
misfortunes. “What are you up to now?”

“Looking for lodgings,” I answered. “Trying to solve the problem as to
whether it is possible to get comfortable rooms at a reasonable price.”

“That’s a strange thing,” remarked my companion; “you are the second
man to-day that has used that expression to me.”

“And who was the first?” I asked.

“A fellow who is working at the chemical laboratory up at the hospital.
He was bemoaning himself this morning because he could not get someone
to go halves with him in some nice rooms which he had found, and which
were too much for his purse.”

“By Jove!” I cried, “if he really wants someone to share the rooms and
the expense, I am the very man for him. I should prefer having a
partner to being alone.”

Young Stamford looked rather strangely at me over his wine-glass. “You
don’t know Sherlock Holmes yet,” he said; “perhaps you would not care
for him as a constant companion.”

“Why, what is there against him?”

“Oh, I didn’t say there was anything against him. He is a little queer
in his ideas—an enthusiast in some branches of science. As far as I
know he is a decent fellow enough.”

“A medical student, I suppose?” said I.

“No—I have no idea what he intends to go in for. I believe he is well
up in anatomy, and he is a first-class chemist; but, as far as I know,
he has never taken out any systematic medical classes. His studies are
very desultory and eccentric, but he has amassed a lot of out-of-the
way knowledge which would astonish his professors.”

“Did you never ask him what he was going in for?” I asked.

“No; he is not a man that it is easy to draw out, though he can be
communicative enough when the fancy seizes him.”

“I should like to meet him,” I said. “If I am to lodge with anyone, I
should prefer a man of studious and quiet habits. I am not strong
enough yet to stand much noise or excitement. I had enough of both in
Afghanistan to last me for the remainder of my natural existence. How
could I meet this friend of yours?”

“He is sure to be at the laboratory,” returned my companion. “He either
avoids the place for weeks, or else he works there from morning to
night. If you like, we shall drive round together after luncheon.”

“Certainly,” I answered, and the conversation drifted away into other
channels.

As we made our way to the hospital after leaving the Holborn, Stamford
gave me a few more particulars about the gentleman whom I proposed to
take as a fellow-lodger.

“You mustn’t blame me if you don’t get on with him,” he said; “I know
nothing more of him than I have learned from meeting him occasionally
in the laboratory. You proposed this arrangement, so you must not hold
me responsible.”

“If we don’t get on it will be easy to part company,” I answered. “It
seems to me, Stamford,” I added, looking hard at my companion, “that
you have some reason for washing your hands of the matter. Is this
fellow’s temper so formidable, or what is it? Don’t be mealy-mouthed
about it.”

“It is not easy to express the inexpressible,” he answered with a
laugh. “Holmes is a little too scientific for my tastes—it approaches
to cold-bloodedness. I could imagine his giving a friend a little pinch
of the latest vegetable alkaloid, not out of malevolence, you
understand, but simply out of a spirit of inquiry in order to have an
accurate idea of the effects. To do him justice, I think that he would
take it himself with the same readiness. He appears to have a passion
for definite and exact knowledge.”

“Very right too.”

“Yes, but it may be pushed to excess. When it comes to beating the
subjects in the dissecting-rooms with a stick, it is certainly taking
rather a bizarre shape.”

“Beating the subjects!”

“Yes, to verify how far bruises may be produced after death. I saw him
at it with my own eyes.”

“And yet you say he is not a medical student?”

“No. Heaven knows what the objects of his studies are. But here we are,
and you must form your own impressions about him.” As he spoke, we
turned down a narrow lane and passed through a small side-door, which
opened into a wing of the great hospital. It was familiar ground to me,
and I needed no guiding as we ascended the bleak stone staircase and
made our way down the long corridor with its vista of whitewashed wall
and dun-coloured doors. Near the further end a low arched passage
branched away from it and led to the chemical laboratory.

This was a lofty chamber, lined and littered with countless bottles.
Broad, low tables were scattered about, which bristled with retorts,
test-tubes, and little Bunsen lamps, with their blue flickering flames.
There was only one student in the room, who was bending over a distant
table absorbed in his work. At the sound of our steps he glanced round
and sprang to his feet with a cry of pleasure. “I’ve found it! I’ve
found it,” he shouted to my companion, running towards us with a
test-tube in his hand. “I have found a re-agent which is precipitated
by hæmoglobin, and by nothing else.” Had he discovered a gold mine,
greater delight could not have shone upon his features.

“Dr. Watson, Mr. Sherlock Holmes,” said Stamford, introducing us.

“How are you?” he said cordially, gripping my hand with a strength for
which I should hardly have given him credit. “You have been in
Afghanistan, I perceive.”

“How on earth did you know that?” I asked in astonishment.

“Never mind,” said he, chuckling to himself. “The question now is about
hæmoglobin. No doubt you see the significance of this discovery of
mine?”

“It is interesting, chemically, no doubt,” I answered, “but
practically——”

“Why, man, it is the most practical medico-legal discovery for years.
Don’t you see that it gives us an infallible test for blood stains.
Come over here now!” He seized me by the coat-sleeve in his eagerness,
and drew me over to the table at which he had been working. “Let us
have some fresh blood,” he said, digging a long bodkin into his finger,
and drawing off the resulting drop of blood in a chemical pipette.
“Now, I add this small quantity of blood to a litre of water. You
perceive that the resulting mixture has the appearance of pure water.
The proportion of blood cannot be more than one in a million. I have no
doubt, however, that we shall be able to obtain the characteristic
reaction.” As he spoke, he threw into the vessel a few white crystals,
and then added some drops of a transparent fluid. In an instant the
contents assumed a dull mahogany colour, and a brownish dust was
precipitated to the bottom of the glass jar.

“Ha! ha!” he cried, clapping his hands, and looking as delighted as a
child with a new toy. “What do you think of that?”

“It seems to be a very delicate test,” I remarked.

“Beautiful! beautiful! The old Guiacum test was very clumsy and
uncertain. So is the microscopic examination for blood corpuscles. The
latter is valueless if the stains are a few hours old. Now, this
appears to act as well whether the blood is old or new. Had this test
been invented, there are hundreds of men now walking the earth who
would long ago have paid the penalty of their crimes.”

“Indeed!” I murmured.

“Criminal cases are continually hinging upon that one point. A man is
suspected of a crime months perhaps after it has been committed. His
linen or clothes are examined, and brownish stains discovered upon
them. Are they blood stains, or mud stains, or rust stains, or fruit
stains, or what are they? That is a question which has puzzled many an
expert, and why? Because there was no reliable test. Now we have the
Sherlock Holmes’ test, and there will no longer be any difficulty.”

His eyes fairly glittered as he spoke, and he put his hand over his
heart and bowed as if to some applauding crowd conjured up by his
imagination.

“You are to be congratulated,” I remarked, considerably surprised at
his enthusiasm.

“There was the case of Von Bischoff at Frankfort last year. He would
certainly have been hung had this test been in existence. Then there
was Mason of Bradford, and the notorious Muller, and Lefevre of
Montpellier, and Samson of New Orleans. I could name a score of cases
in which it would have been decisive.”

“You seem to be a walking calendar of crime,” said Stamford with a
laugh. “You might start a paper on those lines. Call it the ‘Police
News of the Past.’”

“Very interesting reading it might be made, too,” remarked Sherlock
Holmes, sticking a small piece of plaster over the prick on his finger.
“I have to be careful,” he continued, turning to me with a smile, “for
I dabble with poisons a good deal.” He held out his hand as he spoke,
and I noticed that it was all mottled over with similar pieces of
plaster, and discoloured with strong acids.

“We came here on business,” said Stamford, sitting down on a high
three-legged stool, and pushing another one in my direction with his
foot. “My friend here wants to take diggings, and as you were
complaining that you could get no one to go halves with you, I thought
that I had better bring you together.”

Sherlock Holmes seemed delighted at the idea of sharing his rooms with
me. “I have my eye on a suite in Baker Street,” he said, “which would
suit us down to the ground. You don’t mind the smell of strong tobacco,
I hope?”

“I always smoke ‘ship’s’ myself,” I answered.

“That’s good enough. I generally have chemicals about, and occasionally
do experiments. Would that annoy you?”

“By no means.”

“Let me see—what are my other shortcomings. I get in the dumps at
times, and don’t open my mouth for days on end. You must not think I am
sulky when I do that. Just let me alone, and I’ll soon be right. What
have you to confess now? It’s just as well for two fellows to know the
worst of one another before they begin to live together.”

I laughed at this cross-examination. “I keep a bull pup,” I said, “and
I object to rows because my nerves are shaken, and I get up at all
sorts of ungodly hours, and I am extremely lazy. I have another set of
vices when I’m well, but those are the principal ones at present.”

“Do you include violin-playing in your category of rows?” he asked,
anxiously.

“It depends on the player,” I answered. “A well-played violin is a
treat for the gods—a badly-played one——”

“Oh, that’s all right,” he cried, with a merry laugh. “I think we may
consider the thing as settled—that is, if the rooms are agreeable to
you.”

“When shall we see them?”

“Call for me here at noon to-morrow, and we’ll go together and settle
everything,” he answered.

“All right—noon exactly,” said I, shaking his hand.

We left him working among his chemicals, and we walked together towards
my hotel.

“By the way,” I asked suddenly, stopping and turning upon Stamford,
“how the deuce did he know that I had come from Afghanistan?”

My companion smiled an enigmatical smile. “That’s just his little
peculiarity,” he said. “A good many people have wanted to know how he
finds things out.”

“Oh! a mystery is it?” I cried, rubbing my hands. “This is very
piquant. I am much obliged to you for bringing us together. ‘The proper
study of mankind is man,’ you know.”

“You must study him, then,” Stamford said, as he bade me good-bye.
“You’ll find him a knotty problem, though. I’ll wager he learns more
about you than you about him. Good-bye.”

“Good-bye,” I answered, and strolled on to my hotel, considerably
interested in my new acquaintance.




CHAPTER II.
THE SCIENCE OF DEDUCTION.


We met next day as he had arranged, and inspected the rooms at No.
221B, Baker Street, of which he had spoken at our meeting. They
consisted of a couple of comfortable bed-rooms and a single large airy
sitting-room, cheerfully furnished, and illuminated by two broad
windows. So desirable in every way were the apartments, and so moderate
did the terms seem when divided between us, that the bargain was
concluded upon the spot, and we at once entered into possession. That
very evening I moved my things round from the hotel, and on the
following morning Sherlock Holmes followed me with several boxes and
portmanteaus. For a day or two we were busily employed in unpacking and
laying out our property to the best advantage. That done, we gradually
began to settle down and to accommodate ourselves to our new
surroundings.

Holmes was certainly not a difficult man to live with. He was quiet in
his ways, and his habits were regular. It was rare for him to be up
after ten at night, and he had invariably breakfasted and gone out
before I rose in the morning. Sometimes he spent his day at the
chemical laboratory, sometimes in the dissecting-rooms, and
occasionally in long walks, which appeared to take him into the lowest
portions of the City. Nothing could exceed his energy when the working
fit was upon him; but now and again a reaction would seize him, and for
days on end he would lie upon the sofa in the sitting-room, hardly
uttering a word or moving a muscle from morning to night. On these
occasions I have noticed such a dreamy, vacant expression in his eyes,
that I might have suspected him of being addicted to the use of some
narcotic, had not the temperance and cleanliness of his whole life
forbidden such a notion.

As the weeks went by, my interest in him and my curiosity as to his
aims in life, gradually deepened and increased. His very person and
appearance were such as to strike the attention of the most casual
observer. In height he was rather over six feet, and so excessively
lean that he seemed to be considerably taller. His eyes were sharp and
piercing, save during those intervals of torpor to which I have
alluded; and his thin, hawk-like nose gave his whole expression an air
of alertness and decision. His chin, too, had the prominence and
squareness which mark the man of determination. His hands were
invariably blotted with ink and stained with chemicals, yet he was
possessed of extraordinary delicacy of touch, as I frequently had
occasion to observe when I watched him manipulating his fragile
philosophical instruments.

The reader may set me down as a hopeless busybody, when I confess how
much this man stimulated my curiosity, and how often I endeavoured to
break through the reticence which he showed on all that concerned
himself. Before pronouncing judgment, however, be it remembered, how
objectless was my life, and how little there was to engage my
attention. My health forbade me from venturing out unless the weather
was exceptionally genial, and I had no friends who would call upon me
and break the monotony of my daily existence. Under these
circumstances, I eagerly hailed the little mystery which hung around my
companion, and spent much of my time in endeavouring to unravel it.

He was not studying medicine. He had himself, in reply to a question,
confirmed Stamford’s opinion upon that point. Neither did he appear to
have pursued any course of reading which might fit him for a degree in
science or any other recognized portal which would give him an entrance
into the learned world. Yet his zeal for certain studies was
remarkable, and within eccentric limits his knowledge was so
extraordinarily ample and minute that his observations have fairly
astounded me. Surely no man would work so hard or attain such precise
information unless he had some definite end in view. Desultory readers
are seldom remarkable for the exactness of their learning. No man
burdens his mind with small matters unless he has some very good reason
for doing so.

His ignorance was as remarkable as his knowledge. Of contemporary
literature, philosophy and politics he appeared to know next to
nothing. Upon my quoting Thomas Carlyle, he inquired in the naivest way
who he might be and what he had done. My surprise reached a climax,
however, when I found incidentally that he was ignorant of the
Copernican Theory and of the composition of the Solar System. That any
civilized human being in this nineteenth century should not be aware
that the earth travelled round the sun appeared to be to me such an
extraordinary fact that I could hardly realize it.

“You appear to be astonished,” he said, smiling at my expression of
surprise. “Now that I do know it I shall do my best to forget it.”

“To forget it!”

“You see,” he explained, “I consider that a man’s brain originally is
like a little empty attic, and you have to stock it with such furniture
as you choose. A fool takes in all the lumber of every sort that he
comes across, so that the knowledge which might be useful to him gets
crowded out, or at best is jumbled up with a lot of other things so
that he has a difficulty in laying his hands upon it. Now the skilful
workman is very careful indeed as to what he takes into his
brain-attic. He will have nothing but the tools which may help him in
doing his work, but of these he has a large assortment, and all in the
most perfect order. It is a mistake to think that that little room has
elastic walls and can distend to any extent. Depend upon it there comes
a time when for every addition of knowledge you forget something that
you knew before. It is of the highest importance, therefore, not to
have useless facts elbowing out the useful ones.”

“But the Solar System!” I protested.

“What the deuce is it to me?” he interrupted impatiently; “you say that
we go round the sun. If we went round the moon it would not make a
pennyworth of difference to me or to my work.”

I was on the point of asking him what that work might be, but something
in his manner showed me that the question would be an unwelcome one. I
pondered over our short conversation, however, and endeavoured to draw
my deductions from it. He said that he would acquire no knowledge which
did not bear upon his object. Therefore all the knowledge which he
possessed was such as would be useful to him. I enumerated in my own
mind all the various points upon which he had shown me that he was
exceptionally well-informed. I even took a pencil and jotted them down.
I could not help smiling at the document when I had completed it. It
ran in this way—


SHERLOCK HOLMES—his limits.


1. Knowledge of Literature.—Nil.
2. Philosophy.—Nil.
3. Astronomy.—Nil.
4. Politics.—Feeble.
5. Botany.—Variable. Well up in belladonna, opium, and poisons
generally. Knows nothing of practical gardening.
6. Geology.—Practical, but limited. Tells at a glance different soils
from each other. After walks has shown me splashes upon his trousers,
and told me by their colour and consistence in what part of London he
had received them.
7. Chemistry.—Profound.
8. Anatomy.—Accurate, but unsystematic.
9. Sensational Literature.—Immense. He appears to know every detail of
every horror perpetrated in the century.
10. Plays the violin well.
11. Is an expert singlestick player, boxer, and swordsman.
12. Has a good practical knowledge of British law.


When I had got so far in my list I threw it into the fire in despair.
“If I can only find what the fellow is driving at by reconciling all
these accomplishments, and discovering a calling which needs them all,”
I said to myself, “I may as well give up the attempt at once.”

I see that I have alluded above to his powers upon the violin. These
were very remarkable, but as eccentric as all his other
accomplishments. That he could play pieces, and difficult pieces, I
knew well, because at my request he has played me some of Mendelssohn’s
Lieder, and other favourites. When left to himself, however, he would
seldom produce any music or attempt any recognized air. Leaning back in
his arm-chair of an evening, he would close his eyes and scrape
carelessly at the fiddle which was thrown across his knee. Sometimes
the chords were sonorous and melancholy. Occasionally they were
fantastic and cheerful. Clearly they reflected the thoughts which
possessed him, but whether the music aided those thoughts, or whether
the playing was simply the result of a whim or fancy was more than I
could determine. I might have rebelled against these exasperating solos
had it not been that he usually terminated them by playing in quick
succession a whole series of my favourite airs as a slight compensation
for the trial upon my patience.

During the first week or so we had no callers, and I had begun to think
that my companion was as friendless a man as I was myself. Presently,
however, I found that he had many acquaintances, and those in the most
different classes of society. There was one little sallow rat-faced,
dark-eyed fellow who was introduced to me as Mr. Lestrade, and who came
three or four times in a single week. One morning a young girl called,
fashionably dressed, and stayed for half an hour or more. The same
afternoon brought a grey-headed, seedy visitor, looking like a Jew
pedlar, who appeared to me to be much excited, and who was closely
followed by a slip-shod elderly woman. On another occasion an old
white-haired gentleman had an interview with my companion; and on
another a railway porter in his velveteen uniform. When any of these
nondescript individuals put in an appearance, Sherlock Holmes used to
beg for the use of the sitting-room, and I would retire to my bed-room.
He always apologized to me for putting me to this inconvenience. “I
have to use this room as a place of business,” he said, “and these
people are my clients.” Again I had an opportunity of asking him a
point blank question, and again my delicacy prevented me from forcing
another man to confide in me. I imagined at the time that he had some
strong reason for not alluding to it, but he soon dispelled the idea by
coming round to the subject of his own accord.

It was upon the 4th of March, as I have good reason to remember, that I
rose somewhat earlier than usual, and found that Sherlock Holmes had
not yet finished his breakfast. The landlady had become so accustomed
to my late habits that my place had not been laid nor my coffee
prepared. With the unreasonable petulance of mankind I rang the bell
and gave a curt intimation that I was ready. Then I picked up a
magazine from the table and attempted to while away the time with it,
while my companion munched silently at his toast. One of the articles
had a pencil mark at the heading, and I naturally began to run my eye
through it.

Its somewhat ambitious title was “The Book of Life,” and it attempted
to show how much an observant man might learn by an accurate and
systematic examination of all that came in his way. It struck me as
being a remarkable mixture of shrewdness and of absurdity. The
reasoning was close and intense, but the deductions appeared to me to
be far-fetched and exaggerated. The writer claimed by a momentary
expression, a twitch of a muscle or a glance of an eye, to fathom a
man’s inmost thoughts. Deceit, according to him, was an impossibility
in the case of one trained to observation and analysis. His conclusions
were as infallible as so many propositions of Euclid. So startling
would his results appear to the uninitiated that until they learned the
processes by which he had arrived at them they might well consider him
as a necromancer.

“From a drop of water,” said the writer, “a logician could infer the
possibility of an Atlantic or a Niagara without having seen or heard of
one or the other. So all life is a great chain, the nature of which is
known whenever we are shown a single link of it. Like all other arts,
the Science of Deduction and Analysis is one which can only be acquired
by long and patient study nor is life long enough to allow any mortal
to attain the highest possible perfection in it. Before turning to
those moral and mental aspects of the matter which present the greatest
difficulties, let the enquirer begin by mastering more elementary
problems. Let him, on meeting a fellow-mortal, learn at a glance to
distinguish the history of the man, and the trade or profession to
which he belongs. Puerile as such an exercise may seem, it sharpens the
faculties of observation, and teaches one where to look and what to
look for. By a man’s finger nails, by his coat-sleeve, by his boot, by
his trouser knees, by the callosities of his forefinger and thumb, by
his expression, by his shirt cuffs—by each of these things a man’s
calling is plainly revealed. That all united should fail to enlighten
the competent enquirer in any case is almost inconceivable.”

“What ineffable twaddle!” I cried, slapping the magazine down on the
table, “I never read such rubbish in my life.”

“What is it?” asked Sherlock Holmes.

“Why, this article,” I said, pointing at it with my egg spoon as I sat
down to my breakfast. “I see that you have read it since you have
marked it. I don’t deny that it is smartly written. It irritates me
though. It is evidently the theory of some arm-chair lounger who
evolves all these neat little paradoxes in the seclusion of his own
study. It is not practical. I should like to see him clapped down in a
third class carriage on the Underground, and asked to give the trades
of all his fellow-travellers. I would lay a thousand to one against
him.”

“You would lose your money,” Sherlock Holmes remarked calmly. “As for
the article I wrote it myself.”

“You!”

“Yes, I have a turn both for observation and for deduction. The
theories which I have expressed there, and which appear to you to be so
chimerical are really extremely practical—so practical that I depend
upon them for my bread and cheese.”

“And how?” I asked involuntarily.

“Well, I have a trade of my own. I suppose I am the only one in the
world. I’m a consulting detective, if you can understand what that is.
Here in London we have lots of Government detectives and lots of
private ones. When these fellows are at fault they come to me, and I
manage to put them on the right scent. They lay all the evidence before
me, and I am generally able, by the help of my knowledge of the history
of crime, to set them straight. There is a strong family resemblance
about misdeeds, and if you have all the details of a thousand at your
finger ends, it is odd if you can’t unravel the thousand and first.
Lestrade is a well-known detective. He got himself into a fog recently
over a forgery case, and that was what brought him here.”

“And these other people?”

“They are mostly sent on by private inquiry agencies. They are all
people who are in trouble about something, and want a little
enlightening. I listen to their story, they listen to my comments, and
then I pocket my fee.”

“But do you mean to say,” I said, “that without leaving your room you
can unravel some knot which other men can make nothing of, although
they have seen every detail for themselves?”

“Quite so. I have a kind of intuition that way. Now and again a case
turns up which is a little more complex. Then I have to bustle about
and see things with my own eyes. You see I have a lot of special
knowledge which I apply to the problem, and which facilitates matters
wonderfully. Those rules of deduction laid down in that article which
aroused your scorn, are invaluable to me in practical work. Observation
with me is second nature. You appeared to be surprised when I told you,
on our first meeting, that you had come from Afghanistan.”

“You were told, no doubt.”

“Nothing of the sort. I _knew_ you came from Afghanistan. From long
habit the train of thoughts ran so swiftly through my mind, that I
arrived at the conclusion without being conscious of intermediate
steps. There were such steps, however. The train of reasoning ran,
‘Here is a gentleman of a medical type, but with the air of a military
man. Clearly an army doctor, then. He has just come from the tropics,
for his face is dark, and that is not the natural tint of his skin, for
his wrists are fair. He has undergone hardship and sickness, as his
haggard face says clearly. His left arm has been injured. He holds it
in a stiff and unnatural manner. Where in the tropics could an English
army doctor have seen much hardship and got his arm wounded? Clearly in
Afghanistan.’ The whole train of thought did not occupy a second. I
then remarked that you came from Afghanistan, and you were astonished.”

“It is simple enough as you explain it,” I said, smiling. “You remind
me of Edgar Allen Poe’s Dupin. I had no idea that such individuals did
exist outside of stories.”

Sherlock Holmes rose and lit his pipe. “No doubt you think that you are
complimenting me in comparing me to Dupin,” he observed. “Now, in my
opinion, Dupin was a very inferior fellow. That trick of his of
breaking in on his friends’ thoughts with an apropos remark after a
quarter of an hour’s silence is really very showy and superficial. He
had some analytical genius, no doubt; but he was by no means such a
phenomenon as Poe appeared to imagine.”

“Have you read Gaboriau’s works?” I asked. “Does Lecoq come up to your
idea of a detective?”

Sherlock Holmes sniffed sardonically. “Lecoq was a miserable bungler,”
he said, in an angry voice; “he had only one thing to recommend him,
and that was his energy. That book made me positively ill. The question
was how to identify an unknown prisoner. I could have done it in
twenty-four hours. Lecoq took six months or so. It might be made a
text-book for detectives to teach them what to avoid.”

I felt rather indignant at having two characters whom I had admired
treated in this cavalier style. I walked over to the window, and stood
looking out into the busy street. “This fellow may be very clever,” I
said to myself, “but he is certainly very conceited.”

“There are no crimes and no criminals in these days,” he said,
querulously. “What is the use of having brains in our profession. I
know well that I have it in me to make my name famous. No man lives or
has ever lived who has brought the same amount of study and of natural
talent to the detection of crime which I have done. And what is the
result? There is no crime to detect, or, at most, some bungling
villainy with a motive so transparent that even a Scotland Yard
official can see through it.”

I was still annoyed at his bumptious style of conversation. I thought
it best to change the topic.

“I wonder what that fellow is looking for?” I asked, pointing to a
stalwart, plainly-dressed individual who was walking slowly down the
other side of the street, looking anxiously at the numbers. He had a
large blue envelope in his hand, and was evidently the bearer of a
message.

“You mean the retired sergeant of Marines,” said Sherlock Holmes.

“Brag and bounce!” thought I to myself. “He knows that I cannot verify
his guess.”

The thought had hardly passed through my mind when the man whom we were
watching caught sight of the number on our door, and ran rapidly across
the roadway. We heard a loud knock, a deep voice below, and heavy steps
ascending the stair.

“For Mr. Sherlock Holmes,” he said, stepping into the room and handing
my friend the letter.

Here was an opportunity of taking the conceit out of him. He little
thought of this when he made that random shot. “May I ask, my lad,” I
said, in the blandest voice, “what your trade may be?”

“Commissionaire, sir,” he said, gruffly. “Uniform away for repairs.”

“And you were?” I asked, with a slightly malicious glance at my
companion.

“A sergeant, sir, Royal Marine Light Infantry, sir. No answer? Right,
sir.”

He clicked his heels together, raised his hand in a salute, and was
gone.




CHAPTER III.
THE LAURISTON GARDENS MYSTERY


I confess that I was considerably startled by this fresh proof of the
practical nature of my companion’s theories. My respect for his powers
of analysis increased wondrously. There still remained some lurking
suspicion in my mind, however, that the whole thing was a pre-arranged
episode, intended to dazzle me, though what earthly object he could
have in taking me in was past my comprehension. When I looked at him he
had finished reading the note, and his eyes had assumed the vacant,
lack-lustre expression which showed mental abstraction.

“How in the world did you deduce that?” I asked.

“Deduce what?” said he, petulantly.

“Why, that he was a retired sergeant of Marines.”

“I have no time for trifles,” he answered, brusquely; then with a
smile, “Excuse my rudeness. You broke the thread of my thoughts; but
perhaps it is as well. So you actually were not able to see that that
man was a sergeant of Marines?”

“No, indeed.”

“It was easier to know it than to explain why I knew it. If you were
asked to prove that two and two made four, you might find some
difficulty, and yet you are quite sure of the fact. Even across the
street I could see a great blue anchor tattooed on the back of the
fellow’s hand. That smacked of the sea. He had a military carriage,
however, and regulation side whiskers. There we have the marine. He was
a man with some amount of self-importance and a certain air of command.
You must have observed the way in which he held his head and swung his
cane. A steady, respectable, middle-aged man, too, on the face of
him—all facts which led me to believe that he had been a sergeant.”

“Wonderful!” I ejaculated.

“Commonplace,” said Holmes, though I thought from his expression that
he was pleased at my evident surprise and admiration. “I said just now
that there were no criminals. It appears that I am wrong—look at this!”
He threw me over the note which the commissionaire had brought.

“Why,” I cried, as I cast my eye over it, “this is terrible!”

“It does seem to be a little out of the common,” he remarked, calmly.
“Would you mind reading it to me aloud?”

This is the letter which I read to him—

“MY DEAR MR. SHERLOCK HOLMES,—

“There has been a bad business during the night at 3, Lauriston
Gardens, off the Brixton Road. Our man on the beat saw a light there
about two in the morning, and as the house was an empty one, suspected
that something was amiss. He found the door open, and in the front
room, which is bare of furniture, discovered the body of a gentleman,
well dressed, and having cards in his pocket bearing the name of ‘Enoch
J. Drebber, Cleveland, Ohio, U.S.A.’ There had been no robbery, nor is
there any evidence as to how the man met his death. There are marks of
blood in the room, but there is no wound upon his person. We are at a
loss as to how he came into the empty house; indeed, the whole affair
is a puzzler. If you can come round to the house any time before
twelve, you will find me there. I have left everything _in statu quo_
until I hear from you. If you are unable to come I shall give you
fuller details, and would esteem it a great kindness if you would
favour me with your opinion.

              Yours faithfully,
                  “TOBIAS GREGSON.”

“Gregson is the smartest of the Scotland Yarders,” my friend remarked;
“he and Lestrade are the pick of a bad lot. They are both quick and
energetic, but conventional—shockingly so. They have their knives into
one another, too. They are as jealous as a pair of professional
beauties. There will be some fun over this case if they are both put
upon the scent.”

I was amazed at the calm way in which he rippled on. “Surely there is
not a moment to be lost,” I cried, “shall I go and order you a cab?”

“I’m not sure about whether I shall go. I am the most incurably lazy
devil that ever stood in shoe leather—that is, when the fit is on me,
for I can be spry enough at times.”

“Why, it is just such a chance as you have been longing for.”

“My dear fellow, what does it matter to me. Supposing I unravel the
whole matter, you may be sure that Gregson, Lestrade, and Co. will
pocket all the credit. That comes of being an unofficial personage.”

“But he begs you to help him.”

“Yes. He knows that I am his superior, and acknowledges it to me; but
he would cut his tongue out before he would own it to any third person.
However, we may as well go and have a look. I shall work it out on my
own hook. I may have a laugh at them if I have nothing else. Come on!”

He hustled on his overcoat, and bustled about in a way that showed that
an energetic fit had superseded the apathetic one.

“Get your hat,” he said.

“You wish me to come?”

“Yes, if you have nothing better to do.” A minute later we were both in
a hansom, driving furiously for the Brixton Road.

It was a foggy, cloudy morning, and a dun-coloured veil hung over the
house-tops, looking like the reflection of the mud-coloured streets
beneath. My companion was in the best of spirits, and prattled away
about Cremona fiddles, and the difference between a Stradivarius and an
Amati. As for myself, I was silent, for the dull weather and the
melancholy business upon which we were engaged, depressed my spirits.

“You don’t seem to give much thought to the matter in hand,” I said at
last, interrupting Holmes’ musical disquisition.

“No data yet,” he answered. “It is a capital mistake to theorize before
you have all the evidence. It biases the judgment.”

“You will have your data soon,” I remarked, pointing with my finger;
“this is the Brixton Road, and that is the house, if I am not very much
mistaken.”

“So it is. Stop, driver, stop!” We were still a hundred yards or so
from it, but he insisted upon our alighting, and we finished our
journey upon foot.

Number 3, Lauriston Gardens wore an ill-omened and minatory look. It
was one of four which stood back some little way from the street, two
being occupied and two empty. The latter looked out with three tiers of
vacant melancholy windows, which were blank and dreary, save that here
and there a “To Let” card had developed like a cataract upon the
bleared panes. A small garden sprinkled over with a scattered eruption
of sickly plants separated each of these houses from the street, and
was traversed by a narrow pathway, yellowish in colour, and consisting
apparently of a mixture of clay and of gravel. The whole place was very
sloppy from the rain which had fallen through the night. The garden was
bounded by a three-foot brick wall with a fringe of wood rails upon the
top, and against this wall was leaning a stalwart police constable,
surrounded by a small knot of loafers, who craned their necks and
strained their eyes in the vain hope of catching some glimpse of the
proceedings within.

I had imagined that Sherlock Holmes would at once have hurried into the
house and plunged into a study of the mystery. Nothing appeared to be
further from his intention. With an air of nonchalance which, under the
circumstances, seemed to me to border upon affectation, he lounged up
and down the pavement, and gazed vacantly at the ground, the sky, the
opposite houses and the line of railings. Having finished his scrutiny,
he proceeded slowly down the path, or rather down the fringe of grass
which flanked the path, keeping his eyes riveted upon the ground. Twice
he stopped, and once I saw him smile, and heard him utter an
exclamation of satisfaction. There were many marks of footsteps upon
the wet clayey soil, but since the police had been coming and going
over it, I was unable to see how my companion could hope to learn
anything from it. Still I had had such extraordinary evidence of the
quickness of his perceptive faculties, that I had no doubt that he
could see a great deal which was hidden from me.

At the door of the house we were met by a tall, white-faced,
flaxen-haired man, with a notebook in his hand, who rushed forward and
wrung my companion’s hand with effusion. “It is indeed kind of you to
come,” he said, “I have had everything left untouched.”

“Except that!” my friend answered, pointing at the pathway. “If a herd
of buffaloes had passed along there could not be a greater mess. No
doubt, however, you had drawn your own conclusions, Gregson, before you
permitted this.”

“I have had so much to do inside the house,” the detective said
evasively. “My colleague, Mr. Lestrade, is here. I had relied upon him
to look after this.”

Holmes glanced at me and raised his eyebrows sardonically. “With two
such men as yourself and Lestrade upon the ground, there will not be
much for a third party to find out,” he said.

Gregson rubbed his hands in a self-satisfied way. “I think we have done
all that can be done,” he answered; “it’s a queer case though, and I
knew your taste for such things.”

“You did not come here in a cab?” asked Sherlock Holmes.

“No, sir.”

“Nor Lestrade?”

“No, sir.”

“Then let us go and look at the room.” With which inconsequent remark
he strode on into the house, followed by Gregson, whose features
expressed his astonishment.

A short passage, bare planked and dusty, led to the kitchen and
offices. Two doors opened out of it to the left and to the right. One
of these had obviously been closed for many weeks. The other belonged
to the dining-room, which was the apartment in which the mysterious
affair had occurred. Holmes walked in, and I followed him with that
subdued feeling at my heart which the presence of death inspires.

It was a large square room, looking all the larger from the absence of
all furniture. A vulgar flaring paper adorned the walls, but it was
blotched in places with mildew, and here and there great strips had
become detached and hung down, exposing the yellow plaster beneath.
Opposite the door was a showy fireplace, surmounted by a mantelpiece of
imitation white marble. On one corner of this was stuck the stump of a
red wax candle. The solitary window was so dirty that the light was
hazy and uncertain, giving a dull grey tinge to everything, which was
intensified by the thick layer of dust which coated the whole
apartment.

All these details I observed afterwards. At present my attention was
centred upon the single grim motionless figure which lay stretched upon
the boards, with vacant sightless eyes staring up at the discoloured
ceiling. It was that of a man about forty-three or forty-four years of
age, middle-sized, broad shouldered, with crisp curling black hair, and
a short stubbly beard. He was dressed in a heavy broadcloth frock coat
and waistcoat, with light-coloured trousers, and immaculate collar and
cuffs. A top hat, well brushed and trim, was placed upon the floor
beside him. His hands were clenched and his arms thrown abroad, while
his lower limbs were interlocked as though his death struggle had been
a grievous one. On his rigid face there stood an expression of horror,
and as it seemed to me, of hatred, such as I have never seen upon human
features. This malignant and terrible contortion, combined with the low
forehead, blunt nose, and prognathous jaw gave the dead man a
singularly simious and ape-like appearance, which was increased by his
writhing, unnatural posture. I have seen death in many forms, but never
has it appeared to me in a more fearsome aspect than in that dark grimy
apartment, which looked out upon one of the main arteries of suburban
London.

Lestrade, lean and ferret-like as ever, was standing by the doorway,
and greeted my companion and myself.

“This case will make a stir, sir,” he remarked. “It beats anything I
have seen, and I am no chicken.”

“There is no clue?” said Gregson.

“None at all,” chimed in Lestrade.

Sherlock Holmes approached the body, and, kneeling down, examined it
intently. “You are sure that there is no wound?” he asked, pointing to
numerous gouts and splashes of blood which lay all round.

“Positive!” cried both detectives.

“Then, of course, this blood belongs to a second individual—presumably
the murderer, if murder has been committed. It reminds me of the
circumstances attendant on the death of Van Jansen, in Utrecht, in the
year ‘34. Do you remember the case, Gregson?”

“No, sir.”

“Read it up—you really should. There is nothing new under the sun. It
has all been done before.”

As he spoke, his nimble fingers were flying here, there, and
everywhere, feeling, pressing, unbuttoning, examining, while his eyes
wore the same far-away expression which I have already remarked upon.
So swiftly was the examination made, that one would hardly have guessed
the minuteness with which it was conducted. Finally, he sniffed the
dead man’s lips, and then glanced at the soles of his patent leather
boots.

“He has not been moved at all?” he asked.

“No more than was necessary for the purposes of our examination.”

“You can take him to the mortuary now,” he said. “There is nothing more
to be learned.”

Gregson had a stretcher and four men at hand. At his call they entered
the room, and the stranger was lifted and carried out. As they raised
him, a ring tinkled down and rolled across the floor. Lestrade grabbed
it up and stared at it with mystified eyes.

“There’s been a woman here,” he cried. “It’s a woman’s wedding-ring.”

He held it out, as he spoke, upon the palm of his hand. We all gathered
round him and gazed at it. There could be no doubt that that circlet of
plain gold had once adorned the finger of a bride.

“This complicates matters,” said Gregson. “Heaven knows, they were
complicated enough before.”

“You’re sure it doesn’t simplify them?” observed Holmes. “There’s
nothing to be learned by staring at it. What did you find in his
pockets?”

“We have it all here,” said Gregson, pointing to a litter of objects
upon one of the bottom steps of the stairs. “A gold watch, No. 97163,
by Barraud, of London. Gold Albert chain, very heavy and solid. Gold
ring, with masonic device. Gold pin—bull-dog’s head, with rubies as
eyes. Russian leather card-case, with cards of Enoch J. Drebber of
Cleveland, corresponding with the E. J. D. upon the linen. No purse,
but loose money to the extent of seven pounds thirteen. Pocket edition
of Boccaccio’s _Decameron_, with name of Joseph Stangerson upon the
fly-leaf. Two letters—one addressed to E. J. Drebber and one to Joseph
Stangerson.”

“At what address?”

“American Exchange, Strand—to be left till called for. They are both
from the Guion Steamship Company, and refer to the sailing of their
boats from Liverpool. It is clear that this unfortunate man was about
to return to New York.”

“Have you made any inquiries as to this man, Stangerson?”

“I did it at once, sir,” said Gregson. “I have had advertisements sent
to all the newspapers, and one of my men has gone to the American
Exchange, but he has not returned yet.”

“Have you sent to Cleveland?”

“We telegraphed this morning.”

“How did you word your inquiries?”

“We simply detailed the circumstances, and said that we should be glad
of any information which could help us.”

“You did not ask for particulars on any point which appeared to you to
be crucial?”

“I asked about Stangerson.”

“Nothing else? Is there no circumstance on which this whole case
appears to hinge? Will you not telegraph again?”

“I have said all I have to say,” said Gregson, in an offended voice.

Sherlock Holmes chuckled to himself, and appeared to be about to make
some remark, when Lestrade, who had been in the front room while we
were holding this conversation in the hall, reappeared upon the scene,
rubbing his hands in a pompous and self-satisfied manner.

“Mr. Gregson,” he said, “I have just made a discovery of the highest
importance, and one which would have been overlooked had I not made a
careful examination of the walls.”

The little man’s eyes sparkled as he spoke, and he was evidently in a
state of suppressed exultation at having scored a point against his
colleague.

“Come here,” he said, bustling back into the room, the atmosphere of
which felt clearer since the removal of its ghastly inmate. “Now, stand
there!”

He struck a match on his boot and held it up against the wall.

“Look at that!” he said, triumphantly.

I have remarked that the paper had fallen away in parts. In this
particular corner of the room a large piece had peeled off, leaving a
yellow square of coarse plastering. Across this bare space there was
scrawled in blood-red letters a single word—


RACHE.


“What do you think of that?” cried the detective, with the air of a
showman exhibiting his show. “This was overlooked because it was in the
darkest corner of the room, and no one thought of looking there. The
murderer has written it with his or her own blood. See this smear where
it has trickled down the wall! That disposes of the idea of suicide
anyhow. Why was that corner chosen to write it on? I will tell you. See
that candle on the mantelpiece. It was lit at the time, and if it was
lit this corner would be the brightest instead of the darkest portion
of the wall.”

“And what does it mean now that you _have_ found it?” asked Gregson in
a depreciatory voice.

“Mean? Why, it means that the writer was going to put the female name
Rachel, but was disturbed before he or she had time to finish. You mark
my words, when this case comes to be cleared up you will find that a
woman named Rachel has something to do with it. It’s all very well for
you to laugh, Mr. Sherlock Holmes. You may be very smart and clever,
but the old hound is the best, when all is said and done.”

“I really beg your pardon!” said my companion, who had ruffled the
little man’s temper by bursting into an explosion of laughter. “You
certainly have the credit of being the first of us to find this out,
and, as you say, it bears every mark of having been written by the
other participant in last night’s mystery. I have not had time to
examine this room yet, but with your permission I shall do so now.”

As he spoke, he whipped a tape measure and a large round magnifying
glass from his pocket. With these two implements he trotted noiselessly
about the room, sometimes stopping, occasionally kneeling, and once
lying flat upon his face. So engrossed was he with his occupation that
he appeared to have forgotten our presence, for he chattered away to
himself under his breath the whole time, keeping up a running fire of
exclamations, groans, whistles, and little cries suggestive of
encouragement and of hope. As I watched him I was irresistibly reminded
of a pure-blooded well-trained foxhound as it dashes backwards and
forwards through the covert, whining in its eagerness, until it comes
across the lost scent. For twenty minutes or more he continued his
researches, measuring with the most exact care the distance between
marks which were entirely invisible to me, and occasionally applying
his tape to the walls in an equally incomprehensible manner. In one
place he gathered up very carefully a little pile of grey dust from the
floor, and packed it away in an envelope. Finally, he examined with his
glass the word upon the wall, going over every letter of it with the
most minute exactness. This done, he appeared to be satisfied, for he
replaced his tape and his glass in his pocket.

“They say that genius is an infinite capacity for taking pains,” he
remarked with a smile. “It’s a very bad definition, but it does apply
to detective work.”

Gregson and Lestrade had watched the manœuvres of their amateur
companion with considerable curiosity and some contempt. They evidently
failed to appreciate the fact, which I had begun to realize, that
Sherlock Holmes’ smallest actions were all directed towards some
definite and practical end.

“What do you think of it, sir?” they both asked.

“It would be robbing you of the credit of the case if I was to presume
to help you,” remarked my friend. “You are doing so well now that it
would be a pity for anyone to interfere.” There was a world of sarcasm
in his voice as he spoke. “If you will let me know how your
investigations go,” he continued, “I shall be happy to give you any
help I can. In the meantime I should like to speak to the constable who
found the body. Can you give me his name and address?”

Lestrade glanced at his note-book. “John Rance,” he said. “He is off
duty now. You will find him at 46, Audley Court, Kennington Park Gate.”

Holmes took a note of the address.

“Come along, Doctor,” he said; “we shall go and look him up. I’ll tell
you one thing which may help you in the case,” he continued, turning to
the two detectives. “There has been murder done, and the murderer was a
man. He was more than six feet high, was in the prime of life, had
small feet for his height, wore coarse, square-toed boots and smoked a
Trichinopoly cigar. He came here with his victim in a four-wheeled cab,
which was drawn by a horse with three old shoes and one new one on his
off fore leg. In all probability the murderer had a florid face, and
the finger-nails of his right hand were remarkably long. These are only
a few indications, but they may assist you.”

Lestrade and Gregson glanced at each other with an incredulous smile.

“If this man was murdered, how was it done?” asked the former.

“Poison,” said Sherlock Holmes curtly, and strode off. “One other
thing, Lestrade,” he added, turning round at the door: “‘Rache,’ is the
German for ‘revenge;’ so don’t lose your time looking for Miss Rachel.”

With which Parthian shot he walked away, leaving the two rivals
open-mouthed behind him.




CHAPTER IV.
WHAT JOHN RANCE HAD TO TELL.


It was one o’clock when we left No. 3, Lauriston Gardens. Sherlock
Holmes led me to the nearest telegraph office, whence he dispatched a
long telegram. He then hailed a cab, and ordered the driver to take us
to the address given us by Lestrade.

“There is nothing like first hand evidence,” he remarked; “as a matter
of fact, my mind is entirely made up upon the case, but still we may as
well learn all that is to be learned.”

“You amaze me, Holmes,” said I. “Surely you are not as sure as you
pretend to be of all those particulars which you gave.”

“There’s no room for a mistake,” he answered. “The very first thing
which I observed on arriving there was that a cab had made two ruts
with its wheels close to the curb. Now, up to last night, we have had
no rain for a week, so that those wheels which left such a deep
impression must have been there during the night. There were the marks
of the horse’s hoofs, too, the outline of one of which was far more
clearly cut than that of the other three, showing that that was a new
shoe. Since the cab was there after the rain began, and was not there
at any time during the morning—I have Gregson’s word for that—it
follows that it must have been there during the night, and, therefore,
that it brought those two individuals to the house.”

“That seems simple enough,” said I; “but how about the other man’s
height?”

“Why, the height of a man, in nine cases out of ten, can be told from
the length of his stride. It is a simple calculation enough, though
there is no use my boring you with figures. I had this fellow’s stride
both on the clay outside and on the dust within. Then I had a way of
checking my calculation. When a man writes on a wall, his instinct
leads him to write about the level of his own eyes. Now that writing
was just over six feet from the ground. It was child’s play.”

“And his age?” I asked.

“Well, if a man can stride four and a-half feet without the smallest
effort, he can’t be quite in the sere and yellow. That was the breadth
of a puddle on the garden walk which he had evidently walked across.
Patent-leather boots had gone round, and Square-toes had hopped over.
There is no mystery about it at all. I am simply applying to ordinary
life a few of those precepts of observation and deduction which I
advocated in that article. Is there anything else that puzzles you?”

“The finger nails and the Trichinopoly,” I suggested.

“The writing on the wall was done with a man’s forefinger dipped in
blood. My glass allowed me to observe that the plaster was slightly
scratched in doing it, which would not have been the case if the man’s
nail had been trimmed. I gathered up some scattered ash from the floor.
It was dark in colour and flakey—such an ash as is only made by a
Trichinopoly. I have made a special study of cigar ashes—in fact, I
have written a monograph upon the subject. I flatter myself that I can
distinguish at a glance the ash of any known brand, either of cigar or
of tobacco. It is just in such details that the skilled detective
differs from the Gregson and Lestrade type.”

“And the florid face?” I asked.

“Ah, that was a more daring shot, though I have no doubt that I was
right. You must not ask me that at the present state of the affair.”

I passed my hand over my brow. “My head is in a whirl,” I remarked;
“the more one thinks of it the more mysterious it grows. How came these
two men—if there were two men—into an empty house? What has become of
the cabman who drove them? How could one man compel another to take
poison? Where did the blood come from? What was the object of the
murderer, since robbery had no part in it? How came the woman’s ring
there? Above all, why should the second man write up the German word
RACHE before decamping? I confess that I cannot see any possible way of
reconciling all these facts.”

My companion smiled approvingly.

“You sum up the difficulties of the situation succinctly and well,” he
said. “There is much that is still obscure, though I have quite made up
my mind on the main facts. As to poor Lestrade’s discovery it was
simply a blind intended to put the police upon a wrong track, by
suggesting Socialism and secret societies. It was not done by a German.
The A, if you noticed, was printed somewhat after the German fashion.
Now, a real German invariably prints in the Latin character, so that we
may safely say that this was not written by one, but by a clumsy
imitator who overdid his part. It was simply a ruse to divert inquiry
into a wrong channel. I’m not going to tell you much more of the case,
Doctor. You know a conjuror gets no credit when once he has explained
his trick, and if I show you too much of my method of working, you will
come to the conclusion that I am a very ordinary individual after all.”

“I shall never do that,” I answered; “you have brought detection as
near an exact science as it ever will be brought in this world.”

My companion flushed up with pleasure at my words, and the earnest way
in which I uttered them. I had already observed that he was as
sensitive to flattery on the score of his art as any girl could be of
her beauty.

“I’ll tell you one other thing,” he said. “Patent-leathers and
Square-toes came in the same cab, and they walked down the pathway
together as friendly as possible—arm-in-arm, in all probability. When
they got inside they walked up and down the room—or rather,
Patent-leathers stood still while Square-toes walked up and down. I
could read all that in the dust; and I could read that as he walked he
grew more and more excited. That is shown by the increased length of
his strides. He was talking all the while, and working himself up, no
doubt, into a fury. Then the tragedy occurred. I’ve told you all I know
myself now, for the rest is mere surmise and conjecture. We have a good
working basis, however, on which to start. We must hurry up, for I want
to go to Halle’s concert to hear Norman Neruda this afternoon.”

This conversation had occurred while our cab had been threading its way
through a long succession of dingy streets and dreary by-ways. In the
dingiest and dreariest of them our driver suddenly came to a stand.
“That’s Audley Court in there,” he said, pointing to a narrow slit in
the line of dead-coloured brick. “You’ll find me here when you come
back.”

Audley Court was not an attractive locality. The narrow passage led us
into a quadrangle paved with flags and lined by sordid dwellings. We
picked our way among groups of dirty children, and through lines of
discoloured linen, until we came to Number 46, the door of which was
decorated with a small slip of brass on which the name Rance was
engraved. On enquiry we found that the constable was in bed, and we
were shown into a little front parlour to await his coming.

He appeared presently, looking a little irritable at being disturbed in
his slumbers. “I made my report at the office,” he said.

Holmes took a half-sovereign from his pocket and played with it
pensively. “We thought that we should like to hear it all from your own
lips,” he said.

“I shall be most happy to tell you anything I can,” the constable
answered with his eyes upon the little golden disk.

“Just let us hear it all in your own way as it occurred.”

Rance sat down on the horsehair sofa, and knitted his brows as though
determined not to omit anything in his narrative.

“I’ll tell it ye from the beginning,” he said. “My time is from ten at
night to six in the morning. At eleven there was a fight at the ‘White
Hart’; but bar that all was quiet enough on the beat. At one o’clock it
began to rain, and I met Harry Murcher—him who has the Holland Grove
beat—and we stood together at the corner of Henrietta Street a-talkin’.
Presently—maybe about two or a little after—I thought I would take a
look round and see that all was right down the Brixton Road. It was
precious dirty and lonely. Not a soul did I meet all the way down,
though a cab or two went past me. I was a strollin’ down, thinkin’
between ourselves how uncommon handy a four of gin hot would be, when
suddenly the glint of a light caught my eye in the window of that same
house. Now, I knew that them two houses in Lauriston Gardens was empty
on account of him that owns them who won’t have the drains seen to,
though the very last tenant what lived in one of them died o’ typhoid
fever. I was knocked all in a heap therefore at seeing a light in the
window, and I suspected as something was wrong. When I got to the
door——”

“You stopped, and then walked back to the garden gate,” my companion
interrupted. “What did you do that for?”

Rance gave a violent jump, and stared at Sherlock Holmes with the
utmost amazement upon his features.

“Why, that’s true, sir,” he said; “though how you come to know it,
Heaven only knows. Ye see, when I got up to the door it was so still
and so lonesome, that I thought I’d be none the worse for some one with
me. I ain’t afeared of anything on this side o’ the grave; but I
thought that maybe it was him that died o’ the typhoid inspecting the
drains what killed him. The thought gave me a kind o’ turn, and I
walked back to the gate to see if I could see Murcher’s lantern, but
there wasn’t no sign of him nor of anyone else.”

“There was no one in the street?”

“Not a livin’ soul, sir, nor as much as a dog. Then I pulled myself
together and went back and pushed the door open. All was quiet inside,
so I went into the room where the light was a-burnin’. There was a
candle flickerin’ on the mantelpiece—a red wax one—and by its light I
saw——”

“Yes, I know all that you saw. You walked round the room several times,
and you knelt down by the body, and then you walked through and tried
the kitchen door, and then——”

John Rance sprang to his feet with a frightened face and suspicion in
his eyes. “Where was you hid to see all that?” he cried. “It seems to
me that you knows a deal more than you should.”

Holmes laughed and threw his card across the table to the constable.
“Don’t get arresting me for the murder,” he said. “I am one of the
hounds and not the wolf; Mr. Gregson or Mr. Lestrade will answer for
that. Go on, though. What did you do next?”

Rance resumed his seat, without however losing his mystified
expression. “I went back to the gate and sounded my whistle. That
brought Murcher and two more to the spot.”

“Was the street empty then?”

“Well, it was, as far as anybody that could be of any good goes.”

“What do you mean?”

The constable’s features broadened into a grin. “I’ve seen many a drunk
chap in my time,” he said, “but never anyone so cryin’ drunk as that
cove. He was at the gate when I came out, a-leanin’ up agin the
railings, and a-singin’ at the pitch o’ his lungs about Columbine’s
New-fangled Banner, or some such stuff. He couldn’t stand, far less
help.”

“What sort of a man was he?” asked Sherlock Holmes.

John Rance appeared to be somewhat irritated at this digression. “He
was an uncommon drunk sort o’ man,” he said. “He’d ha’ found hisself in
the station if we hadn’t been so took up.”

“His face—his dress—didn’t you notice them?” Holmes broke in
impatiently.

“I should think I did notice them, seeing that I had to prop him up—me
and Murcher between us. He was a long chap, with a red face, the lower
part muffled round——”

“That will do,” cried Holmes. “What became of him?”

“We’d enough to do without lookin’ after him,” the policeman said, in
an aggrieved voice. “I’ll wager he found his way home all right.”

“How was he dressed?”

“A brown overcoat.”

“Had he a whip in his hand?”

“A whip—no.”

“He must have left it behind,” muttered my companion. “You didn’t
happen to see or hear a cab after that?”

“No.”

“There’s a half-sovereign for you,” my companion said, standing up and
taking his hat. “I am afraid, Rance, that you will never rise in the
force. That head of yours should be for use as well as ornament. You
might have gained your sergeant’s stripes last night. The man whom you
held in your hands is the man who holds the clue of this mystery, and
whom we are seeking. There is no use of arguing about it now; I tell
you that it is so. Come along, Doctor.”

We started off for the cab together, leaving our informant incredulous,
but obviously uncomfortable.

“The blundering fool,” Holmes said, bitterly, as we drove back to our
lodgings. “Just to think of his having such an incomparable bit of good
luck, and not taking advantage of it.”

“I am rather in the dark still. It is true that the description of this
man tallies with your idea of the second party in this mystery. But why
should he come back to the house after leaving it? That is not the way
of criminals.”

“The ring, man, the ring: that was what he came back for. If we have no
other way of catching him, we can always bait our line with the ring. I
shall have him, Doctor—I’ll lay you two to one that I have him. I must
thank you for it all. I might not have gone but for you, and so have
missed the finest study I ever came across: a study in scarlet, eh? Why
shouldn’t we use a little art jargon. There’s the scarlet thread of
murder running through the colourless skein of life, and our duty is to
unravel it, and isolate it, and expose every inch of it. And now for
lunch, and then for Norman Neruda. Her attack and her bowing are
splendid. What’s that little thing of Chopin’s she plays so
magnificently: Tra-la-la-lira-lira-lay.”

Leaning back in the cab, this amateur bloodhound carolled away like a
lark while I meditated upon the many-sidedness of the human mind.




CHAPTER V.
OUR ADVERTISEMENT BRINGS A VISITOR.


Our morning’s exertions had been too much for my weak health, and I was
tired out in the afternoon. After Holmes’ departure for the concert, I
lay down upon the sofa and endeavoured to get a couple of hours’ sleep.
It was a useless attempt. My mind had been too much excited by all that
had occurred, and the strangest fancies and surmises crowded into it.
Every time that I closed my eyes I saw before me the distorted
baboon-like countenance of the murdered man. So sinister was the
impression which that face had produced upon me that I found it
difficult to feel anything but gratitude for him who had removed its
owner from the world. If ever human features bespoke vice of the most
malignant type, they were certainly those of Enoch J. Drebber, of
Cleveland. Still I recognized that justice must be done, and that the
depravity of the victim was no condonement in the eyes of the law.

The more I thought of it the more extraordinary did my companion’s
hypothesis, that the man had been poisoned, appear. I remembered how he
had sniffed his lips, and had no doubt that he had detected something
which had given rise to the idea. Then, again, if not poison, what had
caused the man’s death, since there was neither wound nor marks of
strangulation? But, on the other hand, whose blood was that which lay
so thickly upon the floor? There were no signs of a struggle, nor had
the victim any weapon with which he might have wounded an antagonist.
As long as all these questions were unsolved, I felt that sleep would
be no easy matter, either for Holmes or myself. His quiet
self-confident manner convinced me that he had already formed a theory
which explained all the facts, though what it was I could not for an
instant conjecture.

He was very late in returning—so late, that I knew that the concert
could not have detained him all the time. Dinner was on the table
before he appeared.

“It was magnificent,” he said, as he took his seat. “Do you remember
what Darwin says about music? He claims that the power of producing and
appreciating it existed among the human race long before the power of
speech was arrived at. Perhaps that is why we are so subtly influenced
by it. There are vague memories in our souls of those misty centuries
when the world was in its childhood.”

“That’s rather a broad idea,” I remarked.

“One’s ideas must be as broad as Nature if they are to interpret
Nature,” he answered. “What’s the matter? You’re not looking quite
yourself. This Brixton Road affair has upset you.”

“To tell the truth, it has,” I said. “I ought to be more case-hardened
after my Afghan experiences. I saw my own comrades hacked to pieces at
Maiwand without losing my nerve.”

“I can understand. There is a mystery about this which stimulates the
imagination; where there is no imagination there is no horror. Have you
seen the evening paper?”

“No.”

“It gives a fairly good account of the affair. It does not mention the
fact that when the man was raised up, a woman’s wedding ring fell upon
the floor. It is just as well it does not.”

“Why?”

“Look at this advertisement,” he answered. “I had one sent to every
paper this morning immediately after the affair.”

He threw the paper across to me and I glanced at the place indicated.
It was the first announcement in the “Found” column. “In Brixton Road,
this morning,” it ran, “a plain gold wedding ring, found in the roadway
between the ‘White Hart’ Tavern and Holland Grove. Apply Dr. Watson,
221B, Baker Street, between eight and nine this evening.”

“Excuse my using your name,” he said. “If I used my own some of these
dunderheads would recognize it, and want to meddle in the affair.”

“That is all right,” I answered. “But supposing anyone applies, I have
no ring.”

“Oh yes, you have,” said he, handing me one. “This will do very well.
It is almost a facsimile.”

“And who do you expect will answer this advertisement.”

“Why, the man in the brown coat—our florid friend with the square toes.
If he does not come himself he will send an accomplice.”

“Would he not consider it as too dangerous?”

“Not at all. If my view of the case is correct, and I have every reason
to believe that it is, this man would rather risk anything than lose
the ring. According to my notion he dropped it while stooping over
Drebber’s body, and did not miss it at the time. After leaving the
house he discovered his loss and hurried back, but found the police
already in possession, owing to his own folly in leaving the candle
burning. He had to pretend to be drunk in order to allay the suspicions
which might have been aroused by his appearance at the gate. Now put
yourself in that man’s place. On thinking the matter over, it must have
occurred to him that it was possible that he had lost the ring in the
road after leaving the house. What would he do, then? He would eagerly
look out for the evening papers in the hope of seeing it among the
articles found. His eye, of course, would light upon this. He would be
overjoyed. Why should he fear a trap? There would be no reason in his
eyes why the finding of the ring should be connected with the murder.
He would come. He will come. You shall see him within an hour?”

“And then?” I asked.

“Oh, you can leave me to deal with him then. Have you any arms?”

“I have my old service revolver and a few cartridges.”

“You had better clean it and load it. He will be a desperate man, and
though I shall take him unawares, it is as well to be ready for
anything.”

I went to my bedroom and followed his advice. When I returned with the
pistol the table had been cleared, and Holmes was engaged in his
favourite occupation of scraping upon his violin.

“The plot thickens,” he said, as I entered; “I have just had an answer
to my American telegram. My view of the case is the correct one.”

“And that is?” I asked eagerly.

“My fiddle would be the better for new strings,” he remarked. “Put your
pistol in your pocket. When the fellow comes speak to him in an
ordinary way. Leave the rest to me. Don’t frighten him by looking at
him too hard.”

“It is eight o’clock now,” I said, glancing at my watch.

“Yes. He will probably be here in a few minutes. Open the door
slightly. That will do. Now put the key on the inside. Thank you! This
is a queer old book I picked up at a stall yesterday—‘De Jure inter
Gentes’—published in Latin at Liege in the Lowlands, in 1642. Charles’
head was still firm on his shoulders when this little brown-backed
volume was struck off.”

“Who is the printer?”

“Philippe de Croy, whoever he may have been. On the fly-leaf, in very
faded ink, is written ‘Ex libris Guliolmi Whyte.’ I wonder who William
Whyte was. Some pragmatical seventeenth century lawyer, I suppose. His
writing has a legal twist about it. Here comes our man, I think.”

As he spoke there was a sharp ring at the bell. Sherlock Holmes rose
softly and moved his chair in the direction of the door. We heard the
servant pass along the hall, and the sharp click of the latch as she
opened it.

“Does Dr. Watson live here?” asked a clear but rather harsh voice. We
could not hear the servant’s reply, but the door closed, and some one
began to ascend the stairs. The footfall was an uncertain and shuffling
one. A look of surprise passed over the face of my companion as he
listened to it. It came slowly along the passage, and there was a
feeble tap at the door.

“Come in,” I cried.

At my summons, instead of the man of violence whom we expected, a very
old and wrinkled woman hobbled into the apartment. She appeared to be
dazzled by the sudden blaze of light, and after dropping a curtsey, she
stood blinking at us with her bleared eyes and fumbling in her pocket
with nervous, shaky fingers. I glanced at my companion, and his face
had assumed such a disconsolate expression that it was all I could do
to keep my countenance.

The old crone drew out an evening paper, and pointed at our
advertisement. “It’s this as has brought me, good gentlemen,” she said,
dropping another curtsey; “a gold wedding ring in the Brixton Road. It
belongs to my girl Sally, as was married only this time twelvemonth,
which her husband is steward aboard a Union boat, and what he’d say if
he come ‘ome and found her without her ring is more than I can think,
he being short enough at the best o’ times, but more especially when he
has the drink. If it please you, she went to the circus last night
along with——”

“Is that her ring?” I asked.

“The Lord be thanked!” cried the old woman; “Sally will be a glad woman
this night. That’s the ring.”

“And what may your address be?” I inquired, taking up a pencil.

“13, Duncan Street, Houndsditch. A weary way from here.”

“The Brixton Road does not lie between any circus and Houndsditch,”
said Sherlock Holmes sharply.

The old woman faced round and looked keenly at him from her little
red-rimmed eyes. “The gentleman asked me for _my_ address,” she said.
“Sally lives in lodgings at 3, Mayfield Place, Peckham.”

“And your name is——?”

“My name is Sawyer—her’s is Dennis, which Tom Dennis married her—and a
smart, clean lad, too, as long as he’s at sea, and no steward in the
company more thought of; but when on shore, what with the women and
what with liquor shops——”

“Here is your ring, Mrs. Sawyer,” I interrupted, in obedience to a sign
from my companion; “it clearly belongs to your daughter, and I am glad
to be able to restore it to the rightful owner.”

With many mumbled blessings and protestations of gratitude the old
crone packed it away in her pocket, and shuffled off down the stairs.
Sherlock Holmes sprang to his feet the moment that she was gone and
rushed into his room. He returned in a few seconds enveloped in an
ulster and a cravat. “I’ll follow her,” he said, hurriedly; “she must
be an accomplice, and will lead me to him. Wait up for me.” The hall
door had hardly slammed behind our visitor before Holmes had descended
the stair. Looking through the window I could see her walking feebly
along the other side, while her pursuer dogged her some little distance
behind. “Either his whole theory is incorrect,” I thought to myself,
“or else he will be led now to the heart of the mystery.” There was no
need for him to ask me to wait up for him, for I felt that sleep was
impossible until I heard the result of his adventure.

It was close upon nine when he set out. I had no idea how long he might
be, but I sat stolidly puffing at my pipe and skipping over the pages
of Henri Murger’s “Vie de Bohème.” Ten o’clock passed, and I heard the
footsteps of the maid as they pattered off to bed. Eleven, and the more
stately tread of the landlady passed my door, bound for the same
destination. It was close upon twelve before I heard the sharp sound of
his latch-key. The instant he entered I saw by his face that he had not
been successful. Amusement and chagrin seemed to be struggling for the
mastery, until the former suddenly carried the day, and he burst into a
hearty laugh.

“I wouldn’t have the Scotland Yarders know it for the world,” he cried,
dropping into his chair; “I have chaffed them so much that they would
never have let me hear the end of it. I can afford to laugh, because I
know that I will be even with them in the long run.”

“What is it then?” I asked.

“Oh, I don’t mind telling a story against myself. That creature had
gone a little way when she began to limp and show every sign of being
foot-sore. Presently she came to a halt, and hailed a four-wheeler
which was passing. I managed to be close to her so as to hear the
address, but I need not have been so anxious, for she sang it out loud
enough to be heard at the other side of the street, ‘Drive to 13,
Duncan Street, Houndsditch,’ she cried. This begins to look genuine, I
thought, and having seen her safely inside, I perched myself behind.
That’s an art which every detective should be an expert at. Well, away
we rattled, and never drew rein until we reached the street in
question. I hopped off before we came to the door, and strolled down
the street in an easy, lounging way. I saw the cab pull up. The driver
jumped down, and I saw him open the door and stand expectantly. Nothing
came out though. When I reached him he was groping about frantically in
the empty cab, and giving vent to the finest assorted collection of
oaths that ever I listened to. There was no sign or trace of his
passenger, and I fear it will be some time before he gets his fare. On
inquiring at Number 13 we found that the house belonged to a
respectable paperhanger, named Keswick, and that no one of the name
either of Sawyer or Dennis had ever been heard of there.”

“You don’t mean to say,” I cried, in amazement, “that that tottering,
feeble old woman was able to get out of the cab while it was in motion,
without either you or the driver seeing her?”

“Old woman be damned!” said Sherlock Holmes, sharply. “We were the old
women to be so taken in. It must have been a young man, and an active
one, too, besides being an incomparable actor. The get-up was
inimitable. He saw that he was followed, no doubt, and used this means
of giving me the slip. It shows that the man we are after is not as
lonely as I imagined he was, but has friends who are ready to risk
something for him. Now, Doctor, you are looking done-up. Take my advice
and turn in.”

I was certainly feeling very weary, so I obeyed his injunction. I left
Holmes seated in front of the smouldering fire, and long into the
watches of the night I heard the low, melancholy wailings of his
violin, and knew that he was still pondering over the strange problem
which he had set himself to unravel.




CHAPTER VI.
TOBIAS GREGSON SHOWS WHAT HE CAN DO.


The papers next day were full of the “Brixton Mystery,” as they termed
it. Each had a long account of the affair, and some had leaders upon it
in addition. There was some information in them which was new to me. I
still retain in my scrap-book numerous clippings and extracts bearing
upon the case. Here is a condensation of a few of them:—

The _Daily Telegraph_ remarked that in the history of crime there had
seldom been a tragedy which presented stranger features. The German
name of the victim, the absence of all other motive, and the sinister
inscription on the wall, all pointed to its perpetration by political
refugees and revolutionists. The Socialists had many branches in
America, and the deceased had, no doubt, infringed their unwritten
laws, and been tracked down by them. After alluding airily to the
Vehmgericht, aqua tofana, Carbonari, the Marchioness de Brinvilliers,
the Darwinian theory, the principles of Malthus, and the Ratcliff
Highway murders, the article concluded by admonishing the Government
and advocating a closer watch over foreigners in England.

The _Standard_ commented upon the fact that lawless outrages of the
sort usually occurred under a Liberal Administration. They arose from
the unsettling of the minds of the masses, and the consequent weakening
of all authority. The deceased was an American gentleman who had been
residing for some weeks in the Metropolis. He had stayed at the
boarding-house of Madame Charpentier, in Torquay Terrace, Camberwell.
He was accompanied in his travels by his private secretary, Mr. Joseph
Stangerson. The two bade adieu to their landlady upon Tuesday, the 4th
inst., and departed to Euston Station with the avowed intention of
catching the Liverpool express. They were afterwards seen together upon
the platform. Nothing more is known of them until Mr. Drebber’s body
was, as recorded, discovered in an empty house in the Brixton Road,
many miles from Euston. How he came there, or how he met his fate, are
questions which are still involved in mystery. Nothing is known of the
whereabouts of Stangerson. We are glad to learn that Mr. Lestrade and
Mr. Gregson, of Scotland Yard, are both engaged upon the case, and it
is confidently anticipated that these well-known officers will speedily
throw light upon the matter.

The _Daily News_ observed that there was no doubt as to the crime being
a political one. The despotism and hatred of Liberalism which animated
the Continental Governments had had the effect of driving to our shores
a number of men who might have made excellent citizens were they not
soured by the recollection of all that they had undergone. Among these
men there was a stringent code of honour, any infringement of which was
punished by death. Every effort should be made to find the secretary,
Stangerson, and to ascertain some particulars of the habits of the
deceased. A great step had been gained by the discovery of the address
of the house at which he had boarded—a result which was entirely due to
the acuteness and energy of Mr. Gregson of Scotland Yard.

Sherlock Holmes and I read these notices over together at breakfast,
and they appeared to afford him considerable amusement.

“I told you that, whatever happened, Lestrade and Gregson would be sure
to score.”

“That depends on how it turns out.”

“Oh, bless you, it doesn’t matter in the least. If the man is caught,
it will be _on account_ of their exertions; if he escapes, it will be
_in spite_ of their exertions. It’s heads I win and tails you lose.
Whatever they do, they will have followers. ‘Un sot trouve toujours un
plus sot qui l’admire.’”

“What on earth is this?” I cried, for at this moment there came the
pattering of many steps in the hall and on the stairs, accompanied by
audible expressions of disgust upon the part of our landlady.

“It’s the Baker Street division of the detective police force,” said my
companion, gravely; and as he spoke there rushed into the room half a
dozen of the dirtiest and most ragged street Arabs that ever I clapped
eyes on.

“‘Tention!” cried Holmes, in a sharp tone, and the six dirty little
scoundrels stood in a line like so many disreputable statuettes. “In
future you shall send up Wiggins alone to report, and the rest of you
must wait in the street. Have you found it, Wiggins?”

“No, sir, we hain’t,” said one of the youths.

“I hardly expected you would. You must keep on until you do. Here are
your wages.” He handed each of them a shilling.

“Now, off you go, and come back with a better report next time.”

He waved his hand, and they scampered away downstairs like so many
rats, and we heard their shrill voices next moment in the street.

“There’s more work to be got out of one of those little beggars than
out of a dozen of the force,” Holmes remarked. “The mere sight of an
official-looking person seals men’s lips. These youngsters, however, go
everywhere and hear everything. They are as sharp as needles, too; all
they want is organisation.”

“Is it on this Brixton case that you are employing them?” I asked.

“Yes; there is a point which I wish to ascertain. It is merely a matter
of time. Hullo! we are going to hear some news now with a vengeance!
Here is Gregson coming down the road with beatitude written upon every
feature of his face. Bound for us, I know. Yes, he is stopping. There
he is!”

There was a violent peal at the bell, and in a few seconds the
fair-haired detective came up the stairs, three steps at a time, and
burst into our sitting-room.

“My dear fellow,” he cried, wringing Holmes’ unresponsive hand,
“congratulate me! I have made the whole thing as clear as day.”

A shade of anxiety seemed to me to cross my companion’s expressive
face.

“Do you mean that you are on the right track?” he asked.

“The right track! Why, sir, we have the man under lock and key.”

“And his name is?”

“Arthur Charpentier, sub-lieutenant in Her Majesty’s navy,” cried
Gregson, pompously, rubbing his fat hands and inflating his chest.

Sherlock Holmes gave a sigh of relief, and relaxed into a smile.

“Take a seat, and try one of these cigars,” he said. “We are anxious to
know how you managed it. Will you have some whiskey and water?”

“I don’t mind if I do,” the detective answered. “The tremendous
exertions which I have gone through during the last day or two have
worn me out. Not so much bodily exertion, you understand, as the strain
upon the mind. You will appreciate that, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, for we
are both brain-workers.”

“You do me too much honour,” said Holmes, gravely. “Let us hear how you
arrived at this most gratifying result.”

The detective seated himself in the arm-chair, and puffed complacently
at his cigar. Then suddenly he slapped his thigh in a paroxysm of
amusement.

“The fun of it is,” he cried, “that that fool Lestrade, who thinks
himself so smart, has gone off upon the wrong track altogether. He is
after the secretary Stangerson, who had no more to do with the crime
than the babe unborn. I have no doubt that he has caught him by this
time.”

The idea tickled Gregson so much that he laughed until he choked.

“And how did you get your clue?”

“Ah, I’ll tell you all about it. Of course, Doctor Watson, this is
strictly between ourselves. The first difficulty which we had to
contend with was the finding of this American’s antecedents. Some
people would have waited until their advertisements were answered, or
until parties came forward and volunteered information. That is not
Tobias Gregson’s way of going to work. You remember the hat beside the
dead man?”

“Yes,” said Holmes; “by John Underwood and Sons, 129, Camberwell Road.”

Gregson looked quite crest-fallen.

“I had no idea that you noticed that,” he said. “Have you been there?”

“No.”

“Ha!” cried Gregson, in a relieved voice; “you should never neglect a
chance, however small it may seem.”

“To a great mind, nothing is little,” remarked Holmes, sententiously.

“Well, I went to Underwood, and asked him if he had sold a hat of that
size and description. He looked over his books, and came on it at once.
He had sent the hat to a Mr. Drebber, residing at Charpentier’s
Boarding Establishment, Torquay Terrace. Thus I got at his address.”

“Smart—very smart!” murmured Sherlock Holmes.

“I next called upon Madame Charpentier,” continued the detective. “I
found her very pale and distressed. Her daughter was in the room,
too—an uncommonly fine girl she is, too; she was looking red about the
eyes and her lips trembled as I spoke to her. That didn’t escape my
notice. I began to smell a rat. You know the feeling, Mr. Sherlock
Holmes, when you come upon the right scent—a kind of thrill in your
nerves. ‘Have you heard of the mysterious death of your late boarder
Mr. Enoch J. Drebber, of Cleveland?’ I asked.

“The mother nodded. She didn’t seem able to get out a word. The
daughter burst into tears. I felt more than ever that these people knew
something of the matter.

“‘At what o’clock did Mr. Drebber leave your house for the train?’ I
asked.

“‘At eight o’clock,’ she said, gulping in her throat to keep down her
agitation. ‘His secretary, Mr. Stangerson, said that there were two
trains—one at 9.15 and one at 11. He was to catch the first.’

“‘And was that the last which you saw of him?’

“A terrible change came over the woman’s face as I asked the question.
Her features turned perfectly livid. It was some seconds before she
could get out the single word ‘Yes’—and when it did come it was in a
husky unnatural tone.

“There was silence for a moment, and then the daughter spoke in a calm
clear voice.

“‘No good can ever come of falsehood, mother,’ she said. ‘Let us be
frank with this gentleman. We _did_ see Mr. Drebber again.’

“‘God forgive you!’ cried Madame Charpentier, throwing up her hands and
sinking back in her chair. ‘You have murdered your brother.’

“‘Arthur would rather that we spoke the truth,’ the girl answered
firmly.

“‘You had best tell me all about it now,’ I said. ‘Half-confidences are
worse than none. Besides, you do not know how much we know of it.’

“‘On your head be it, Alice!’ cried her mother; and then, turning to
me, ‘I will tell you all, sir. Do not imagine that my agitation on
behalf of my son arises from any fear lest he should have had a hand in
this terrible affair. He is utterly innocent of it. My dread is,
however, that in your eyes and in the eyes of others he may appear to
be compromised. That however is surely impossible. His high character,
his profession, his antecedents would all forbid it.’

“‘Your best way is to make a clean breast of the facts,’ I answered.
‘Depend upon it, if your son is innocent he will be none the worse.’

“‘Perhaps, Alice, you had better leave us together,’ she said, and her
daughter withdrew. ‘Now, sir,’ she continued, ‘I had no intention of
telling you all this, but since my poor daughter has disclosed it I
have no alternative. Having once decided to speak, I will tell you all
without omitting any particular.’

“‘It is your wisest course,’ said I.

“‘Mr. Drebber has been with us nearly three weeks. He and his
secretary, Mr. Stangerson, had been travelling on the Continent. I
noticed a “Copenhagen” label upon each of their trunks, showing that
that had been their last stopping place. Stangerson was a quiet
reserved man, but his employer, I am sorry to say, was far otherwise.
He was coarse in his habits and brutish in his ways. The very night of
his arrival he became very much the worse for drink, and, indeed, after
twelve o’clock in the day he could hardly ever be said to be sober. His
manners towards the maid-servants were disgustingly free and familiar.
Worst of all, he speedily assumed the same attitude towards my
daughter, Alice, and spoke to her more than once in a way which,
fortunately, she is too innocent to understand. On one occasion he
actually seized her in his arms and embraced her—an outrage which
caused his own secretary to reproach him for his unmanly conduct.’

“‘But why did you stand all this,’ I asked. ‘I suppose that you can get
rid of your boarders when you wish.’

“Mrs. Charpentier blushed at my pertinent question. ‘Would to God that
I had given him notice on the very day that he came,’ she said. ‘But it
was a sore temptation. They were paying a pound a day each—fourteen
pounds a week, and this is the slack season. I am a widow, and my boy
in the Navy has cost me much. I grudged to lose the money. I acted for
the best. This last was too much, however, and I gave him notice to
leave on account of it. That was the reason of his going.’

“‘Well?’

“‘My heart grew light when I saw him drive away. My son is on leave
just now, but I did not tell him anything of all this, for his temper
is violent, and he is passionately fond of his sister. When I closed
the door behind them a load seemed to be lifted from my mind. Alas, in
less than an hour there was a ring at the bell, and I learned that Mr.
Drebber had returned. He was much excited, and evidently the worse for
drink. He forced his way into the room, where I was sitting with my
daughter, and made some incoherent remark about having missed his
train. He then turned to Alice, and before my very face, proposed to
her that she should fly with him. “You are of age,” he said, “and there
is no law to stop you. I have money enough and to spare. Never mind the
old girl here, but come along with me now straight away. You shall live
like a princess.” Poor Alice was so frightened that she shrunk away
from him, but he caught her by the wrist and endeavoured to draw her
towards the door. I screamed, and at that moment my son Arthur came
into the room. What happened then I do not know. I heard oaths and the
confused sounds of a scuffle. I was too terrified to raise my head.
When I did look up I saw Arthur standing in the doorway laughing, with
a stick in his hand. “I don’t think that fine fellow will trouble us
again,” he said. “I will just go after him and see what he does with
himself.” With those words he took his hat and started off down the
street. The next morning we heard of Mr. Drebber’s mysterious death.’

“This statement came from Mrs. Charpentier’s lips with many gasps and
pauses. At times she spoke so low that I could hardly catch the words.
I made shorthand notes of all that she said, however, so that there
should be no possibility of a mistake.”

“It’s quite exciting,” said Sherlock Holmes, with a yawn. “What
happened next?”

“When Mrs. Charpentier paused,” the detective continued, “I saw that
the whole case hung upon one point. Fixing her with my eye in a way
which I always found effective with women, I asked her at what hour her
son returned.

“‘I do not know,’ she answered.

“‘Not know?’

“‘No; he has a latch-key, and he let himself in.’

“‘After you went to bed?’

“‘Yes.’

“‘When did you go to bed?’

“‘About eleven.’

“‘So your son was gone at least two hours?’

“‘Yes.’

“‘Possibly four or five?’

“‘Yes.’

“‘What was he doing during that time?’

“‘I do not know,’ she answered, turning white to her very lips.

“Of course after that there was nothing more to be done. I found out
where Lieutenant Charpentier was, took two officers with me, and
arrested him. When I touched him on the shoulder and warned him to come
quietly with us, he answered us as bold as brass, ‘I suppose you are
arresting me for being concerned in the death of that scoundrel
Drebber,’ he said. We had said nothing to him about it, so that his
alluding to it had a most suspicious aspect.”

“Very,” said Holmes.

“He still carried the heavy stick which the mother described him as
having with him when he followed Drebber. It was a stout oak cudgel.”

“What is your theory, then?”

“Well, my theory is that he followed Drebber as far as the Brixton
Road. When there, a fresh altercation arose between them, in the course
of which Drebber received a blow from the stick, in the pit of the
stomach, perhaps, which killed him without leaving any mark. The night
was so wet that no one was about, so Charpentier dragged the body of
his victim into the empty house. As to the candle, and the blood, and
the writing on the wall, and the ring, they may all be so many tricks
to throw the police on to the wrong scent.”

“Well done!” said Holmes in an encouraging voice. “Really, Gregson, you
are getting along. We shall make something of you yet.”

“I flatter myself that I have managed it rather neatly,” the detective
answered proudly. “The young man volunteered a statement, in which he
said that after following Drebber some time, the latter perceived him,
and took a cab in order to get away from him. On his way home he met an
old shipmate, and took a long walk with him. On being asked where this
old shipmate lived, he was unable to give any satisfactory reply. I
think the whole case fits together uncommonly well. What amuses me is
to think of Lestrade, who had started off upon the wrong scent. I am
afraid he won’t make much of it. Why, by Jove, here’s the very man
himself!”

It was indeed Lestrade, who had ascended the stairs while we were
talking, and who now entered the room. The assurance and jauntiness
which generally marked his demeanour and dress were, however, wanting.
His face was disturbed and troubled, while his clothes were disarranged
and untidy. He had evidently come with the intention of consulting with
Sherlock Holmes, for on perceiving his colleague he appeared to be
embarrassed and put out. He stood in the centre of the room, fumbling
nervously with his hat and uncertain what to do. “This is a most
extraordinary case,” he said at last—“a most incomprehensible affair.”

“Ah, you find it so, Mr. Lestrade!” cried Gregson, triumphantly. “I
thought you would come to that conclusion. Have you managed to find the
Secretary, Mr. Joseph Stangerson?”

“The Secretary, Mr. Joseph Stangerson,” said Lestrade gravely, “was
murdered at Halliday’s Private Hotel about six o’clock this morning.”




CHAPTER VII.
LIGHT IN THE DARKNESS.


The intelligence with which Lestrade greeted us was so momentous and so
unexpected, that we were all three fairly dumfoundered. Gregson sprang
out of his chair and upset the remainder of his whiskey and water. I
stared in silence at Sherlock Holmes, whose lips were compressed and
his brows drawn down over his eyes.

“Stangerson too!” he muttered. “The plot thickens.”

“It was quite thick enough before,” grumbled Lestrade, taking a chair.
“I seem to have dropped into a sort of council of war.”

“Are you—are you sure of this piece of intelligence?” stammered
Gregson.

“I have just come from his room,” said Lestrade. “I was the first to
discover what had occurred.”

“We have been hearing Gregson’s view of the matter,” Holmes observed.
“Would you mind letting us know what you have seen and done?”

“I have no objection,” Lestrade answered, seating himself. “I freely
confess that I was of the opinion that Stangerson was concerned in the
death of Drebber. This fresh development has shown me that I was
completely mistaken. Full of the one idea, I set myself to find out
what had become of the Secretary. They had been seen together at Euston
Station about half-past eight on the evening of the third. At two in
the morning Drebber had been found in the Brixton Road. The question
which confronted me was to find out how Stangerson had been employed
between 8.30 and the time of the crime, and what had become of him
afterwards. I telegraphed to Liverpool, giving a description of the
man, and warning them to keep a watch upon the American boats. I then
set to work calling upon all the hotels and lodging-houses in the
vicinity of Euston. You see, I argued that if Drebber and his companion
had become separated, the natural course for the latter would be to put
up somewhere in the vicinity for the night, and then to hang about the
station again next morning.”

“They would be likely to agree on some meeting-place beforehand,”
remarked Holmes.

“So it proved. I spent the whole of yesterday evening in making
enquiries entirely without avail. This morning I began very early, and
at eight o’clock I reached Halliday’s Private Hotel, in Little George
Street. On my enquiry as to whether a Mr. Stangerson was living there,
they at once answered me in the affirmative.

“‘No doubt you are the gentleman whom he was expecting,’ they said. ‘He
has been waiting for a gentleman for two days.’

“‘Where is he now?’ I asked.

“‘He is upstairs in bed. He wished to be called at nine.’

“‘I will go up and see him at once,’ I said.

“It seemed to me that my sudden appearance might shake his nerves and
lead him to say something unguarded. The Boots volunteered to show me
the room: it was on the second floor, and there was a small corridor
leading up to it. The Boots pointed out the door to me, and was about
to go downstairs again when I saw something that made me feel sickish,
in spite of my twenty years’ experience. From under the door there
curled a little red ribbon of blood, which had meandered across the
passage and formed a little pool along the skirting at the other side.
I gave a cry, which brought the Boots back. He nearly fainted when he
saw it. The door was locked on the inside, but we put our shoulders to
it, and knocked it in. The window of the room was open, and beside the
window, all huddled up, lay the body of a man in his nightdress. He was
quite dead, and had been for some time, for his limbs were rigid and
cold. When we turned him over, the Boots recognized him at once as
being the same gentleman who had engaged the room under the name of
Joseph Stangerson. The cause of death was a deep stab in the left side,
which must have penetrated the heart. And now comes the strangest part
of the affair. What do you suppose was above the murdered man?”

I felt a creeping of the flesh, and a presentiment of coming horror,
even before Sherlock Holmes answered.

“The word RACHE, written in letters of blood,” he said.

“That was it,” said Lestrade, in an awe-struck voice; and we were all
silent for a while.

There was something so methodical and so incomprehensible about the
deeds of this unknown assassin, that it imparted a fresh ghastliness to
his crimes. My nerves, which were steady enough on the field of battle
tingled as I thought of it.

“The man was seen,” continued Lestrade. “A milk boy, passing on his way
to the dairy, happened to walk down the lane which leads from the mews
at the back of the hotel. He noticed that a ladder, which usually lay
there, was raised against one of the windows of the second floor, which
was wide open. After passing, he looked back and saw a man descend the
ladder. He came down so quietly and openly that the boy imagined him to
be some carpenter or joiner at work in the hotel. He took no particular
notice of him, beyond thinking in his own mind that it was early for
him to be at work. He has an impression that the man was tall, had a
reddish face, and was dressed in a long, brownish coat. He must have
stayed in the room some little time after the murder, for we found
blood-stained water in the basin, where he had washed his hands, and
marks on the sheets where he had deliberately wiped his knife.”

I glanced at Holmes on hearing the description of the murderer, which
tallied so exactly with his own. There was, however, no trace of
exultation or satisfaction upon his face.

“Did you find nothing in the room which could furnish a clue to the
murderer?” he asked.

“Nothing. Stangerson had Drebber’s purse in his pocket, but it seems
that this was usual, as he did all the paying. There was eighty odd
pounds in it, but nothing had been taken. Whatever the motives of these
extraordinary crimes, robbery is certainly not one of them. There were
no papers or memoranda in the murdered man’s pocket, except a single
telegram, dated from Cleveland about a month ago, and containing the
words, ‘J. H. is in Europe.’ There was no name appended to this
message.”

“And there was nothing else?” Holmes asked.

“Nothing of any importance. The man’s novel, with which he had read
himself to sleep was lying upon the bed, and his pipe was on a chair
beside him. There was a glass of water on the table, and on the
window-sill a small chip ointment box containing a couple of pills.”

Sherlock Holmes sprang from his chair with an exclamation of delight.

“The last link,” he cried, exultantly. “My case is complete.”

The two detectives stared at him in amazement.

“I have now in my hands,” my companion said, confidently, “all the
threads which have formed such a tangle. There are, of course, details
to be filled in, but I am as certain of all the main facts, from the
time that Drebber parted from Stangerson at the station, up to the
discovery of the body of the latter, as if I had seen them with my own
eyes. I will give you a proof of my knowledge. Could you lay your hand
upon those pills?”

“I have them,” said Lestrade, producing a small white box; “I took them
and the purse and the telegram, intending to have them put in a place
of safety at the Police Station. It was the merest chance my taking
these pills, for I am bound to say that I do not attach any importance
to them.”

“Give them here,” said Holmes. “Now, Doctor,” turning to me, “are those
ordinary pills?”

They certainly were not. They were of a pearly grey colour, small,
round, and almost transparent against the light. “From their lightness
and transparency, I should imagine that they are soluble in water,” I
remarked.

“Precisely so,” answered Holmes. “Now would you mind going down and
fetching that poor little devil of a terrier which has been bad so
long, and which the landlady wanted you to put out of its pain
yesterday.”

I went downstairs and carried the dog upstair in my arms. It’s laboured
breathing and glazing eye showed that it was not far from its end.
Indeed, its snow-white muzzle proclaimed that it had already exceeded
the usual term of canine existence. I placed it upon a cushion on the
rug.

“I will now cut one of these pills in two,” said Holmes, and drawing
his penknife he suited the action to the word. “One half we return into
the box for future purposes. The other half I will place in this wine
glass, in which is a teaspoonful of water. You perceive that our
friend, the Doctor, is right, and that it readily dissolves.”

“This may be very interesting,” said Lestrade, in the injured tone of
one who suspects that he is being laughed at, “I cannot see, however,
what it has to do with the death of Mr. Joseph Stangerson.”

“Patience, my friend, patience! You will find in time that it has
everything to do with it. I shall now add a little milk to make the
mixture palatable, and on presenting it to the dog we find that he laps
it up readily enough.”

As he spoke he turned the contents of the wine glass into a saucer and
placed it in front of the terrier, who speedily licked it dry. Sherlock
Holmes’ earnest demeanour had so far convinced us that we all sat in
silence, watching the animal intently, and expecting some startling
effect. None such appeared, however. The dog continued to lie stretched
upon the cushion, breathing in a laboured way, but apparently neither
the better nor the worse for its draught.

Holmes had taken out his watch, and as minute followed minute without
result, an expression of the utmost chagrin and disappointment appeared
upon his features. He gnawed his lip, drummed his fingers upon the
table, and showed every other symptom of acute impatience. So great was
his emotion, that I felt sincerely sorry for him, while the two
detectives smiled derisively, by no means displeased at this check
which he had met.

“It can’t be a coincidence,” he cried, at last springing from his chair
and pacing wildly up and down the room; “it is impossible that it
should be a mere coincidence. The very pills which I suspected in the
case of Drebber are actually found after the death of Stangerson. And
yet they are inert. What can it mean? Surely my whole chain of
reasoning cannot have been false. It is impossible! And yet this
wretched dog is none the worse. Ah, I have it! I have it!” With a
perfect shriek of delight he rushed to the box, cut the other pill in
two, dissolved it, added milk, and presented it to the terrier. The
unfortunate creature’s tongue seemed hardly to have been moistened in
it before it gave a convulsive shiver in every limb, and lay as rigid
and lifeless as if it had been struck by lightning.

Sherlock Holmes drew a long breath, and wiped the perspiration from his
forehead. “I should have more faith,” he said; “I ought to know by this
time that when a fact appears to be opposed to a long train of
deductions, it invariably proves to be capable of bearing some other
interpretation. Of the two pills in that box one was of the most deadly
poison, and the other was entirely harmless. I ought to have known that
before ever I saw the box at all.”

This last statement appeared to me to be so startling, that I could
hardly believe that he was in his sober senses. There was the dead dog,
however, to prove that his conjecture had been correct. It seemed to me
that the mists in my own mind were gradually clearing away, and I began
to have a dim, vague perception of the truth.

“All this seems strange to you,” continued Holmes, “because you failed
at the beginning of the inquiry to grasp the importance of the single
real clue which was presented to you. I had the good fortune to seize
upon that, and everything which has occurred since then has served to
confirm my original supposition, and, indeed, was the logical sequence
of it. Hence things which have perplexed you and made the case more
obscure, have served to enlighten me and to strengthen my conclusions.
It is a mistake to confound strangeness with mystery. The most
commonplace crime is often the most mysterious because it presents no
new or special features from which deductions may be drawn. This murder
would have been infinitely more difficult to unravel had the body of
the victim been simply found lying in the roadway without any of those
_outré_ and sensational accompaniments which have rendered it
remarkable. These strange details, far from making the case more
difficult, have really had the effect of making it less so.”

Mr. Gregson, who had listened to this address with considerable
impatience, could contain himself no longer. “Look here, Mr. Sherlock
Holmes,” he said, “we are all ready to acknowledge that you are a smart
man, and that you have your own methods of working. We want something
more than mere theory and preaching now, though. It is a case of taking
the man. I have made my case out, and it seems I was wrong. Young
Charpentier could not have been engaged in this second affair. Lestrade
went after his man, Stangerson, and it appears that he was wrong too.
You have thrown out hints here, and hints there, and seem to know more
than we do, but the time has come when we feel that we have a right to
ask you straight how much you do know of the business. Can you name the
man who did it?”

“I cannot help feeling that Gregson is right, sir,” remarked Lestrade.
“We have both tried, and we have both failed. You have remarked more
than once since I have been in the room that you had all the evidence
which you require. Surely you will not withhold it any longer.”

“Any delay in arresting the assassin,” I observed, “might give him time
to perpetrate some fresh atrocity.”

Thus pressed by us all, Holmes showed signs of irresolution. He
continued to walk up and down the room with his head sunk on his chest
and his brows drawn down, as was his habit when lost in thought.

“There will be no more murders,” he said at last, stopping abruptly and
facing us. “You can put that consideration out of the question. You
have asked me if I know the name of the assassin. I do. The mere
knowing of his name is a small thing, however, compared with the power
of laying our hands upon him. This I expect very shortly to do. I have
good hopes of managing it through my own arrangements; but it is a
thing which needs delicate handling, for we have a shrewd and desperate
man to deal with, who is supported, as I have had occasion to prove, by
another who is as clever as himself. As long as this man has no idea
that anyone can have a clue there is some chance of securing him; but
if he had the slightest suspicion, he would change his name, and vanish
in an instant among the four million inhabitants of this great city.
Without meaning to hurt either of your feelings, I am bound to say that
I consider these men to be more than a match for the official force,
and that is why I have not asked your assistance. If I fail I shall, of
course, incur all the blame due to this omission; but that I am
prepared for. At present I am ready to promise that the instant that I
can communicate with you without endangering my own combinations, I
shall do so.”

Gregson and Lestrade seemed to be far from satisfied by this assurance,
or by the depreciating allusion to the detective police. The former had
flushed up to the roots of his flaxen hair, while the other’s beady
eyes glistened with curiosity and resentment. Neither of them had time
to speak, however, before there was a tap at the door, and the
spokesman of the street Arabs, young Wiggins, introduced his
insignificant and unsavoury person.

“Please, sir,” he said, touching his forelock, “I have the cab
downstairs.”

“Good boy,” said Holmes, blandly. “Why don’t you introduce this pattern
at Scotland Yard?” he continued, taking a pair of steel handcuffs from
a drawer. “See how beautifully the spring works. They fasten in an
instant.”

“The old pattern is good enough,” remarked Lestrade, “if we can only
find the man to put them on.”

“Very good, very good,” said Holmes, smiling. “The cabman may as well
help me with my boxes. Just ask him to step up, Wiggins.”

I was surprised to find my companion speaking as though he were about
to set out on a journey, since he had not said anything to me about it.
There was a small portmanteau in the room, and this he pulled out and
began to strap. He was busily engaged at it when the cabman entered the
room.

“Just give me a help with this buckle, cabman,” he said, kneeling over
his task, and never turning his head.

The fellow came forward with a somewhat sullen, defiant air, and put
down his hands to assist. At that instant there was a sharp click, the
jangling of metal, and Sherlock Holmes sprang to his feet again.

“Gentlemen,” he cried, with flashing eyes, “let me introduce you to Mr.
Jefferson Hope, the murderer of Enoch Drebber and of Joseph
Stangerson.”

The whole thing occurred in a moment—so quickly that I had no time to
realize it. I have a vivid recollection of that instant, of Holmes’
triumphant expression and the ring of his voice, of the cabman’s dazed,
savage face, as he glared at the glittering handcuffs, which had
appeared as if by magic upon his wrists. For a second or two we might
have been a group of statues. Then, with an inarticulate roar of fury,
the prisoner wrenched himself free from Holmes’s grasp, and hurled
himself through the window. Woodwork and glass gave way before him; but
before he got quite through, Gregson, Lestrade, and Holmes sprang upon
him like so many staghounds. He was dragged back into the room, and
then commenced a terrific conflict. So powerful and so fierce was he,
that the four of us were shaken off again and again. He appeared to
have the convulsive strength of a man in an epileptic fit. His face and
hands were terribly mangled by his passage through the glass, but loss
of blood had no effect in diminishing his resistance. It was not until
Lestrade succeeded in getting his hand inside his neckcloth and
half-strangling him that we made him realize that his struggles were of
no avail; and even then we felt no security until we had pinioned his
feet as well as his hands. That done, we rose to our feet breathless
and panting.

“We have his cab,” said Sherlock Holmes. “It will serve to take him to
Scotland Yard. And now, gentlemen,” he continued, with a pleasant
smile, “we have reached the end of our little mystery. You are very
welcome to put any questions that you like to me now, and there is no
danger that I will refuse to answer them.”




PART II.
_The Country of the Saints._




CHAPTER I.
ON THE GREAT ALKALI PLAIN.


In the central portion of the great North American Continent there lies
an arid and repulsive desert, which for many a long year served as a
barrier against the advance of civilisation. From the Sierra Nevada to
Nebraska, and from the Yellowstone River in the north to the Colorado
upon the south, is a region of desolation and silence. Nor is Nature
always in one mood throughout this grim district. It comprises
snow-capped and lofty mountains, and dark and gloomy valleys. There are
swift-flowing rivers which dash through jagged cañons; and there are
enormous plains, which in winter are white with snow, and in summer are
grey with the saline alkali dust. They all preserve, however, the
common characteristics of barrenness, inhospitality, and misery.

There are no inhabitants of this land of despair. A band of Pawnees or
of Blackfeet may occasionally traverse it in order to reach other
hunting-grounds, but the hardiest of the braves are glad to lose sight
of those awesome plains, and to find themselves once more upon their
prairies. The coyote skulks among the scrub, the buzzard flaps heavily
through the air, and the clumsy grizzly bear lumbers through the dark
ravines, and picks up such sustenance as it can amongst the rocks.
These are the sole dwellers in the wilderness.

In the whole world there can be no more dreary view than that from the
northern slope of the Sierra Blanco. As far as the eye can reach
stretches the great flat plain-land, all dusted over with patches of
alkali, and intersected by clumps of the dwarfish chaparral bushes. On
the extreme verge of the horizon lie a long chain of mountain peaks,
with their rugged summits flecked with snow. In this great stretch of
country there is no sign of life, nor of anything appertaining to life.
There is no bird in the steel-blue heaven, no movement upon the dull,
grey earth—above all, there is absolute silence. Listen as one may,
there is no shadow of a sound in all that mighty wilderness; nothing
but silence—complete and heart-subduing silence.

It has been said there is nothing appertaining to life upon the broad
plain. That is hardly true. Looking down from the Sierra Blanco, one
sees a pathway traced out across the desert, which winds away and is
lost in the extreme distance. It is rutted with wheels and trodden down
by the feet of many adventurers. Here and there there are scattered
white objects which glisten in the sun, and stand out against the dull
deposit of alkali. Approach, and examine them! They are bones: some
large and coarse, others smaller and more delicate. The former have
belonged to oxen, and the latter to men. For fifteen hundred miles one
may trace this ghastly caravan route by these scattered remains of
those who had fallen by the wayside.

Looking down on this very scene, there stood upon the fourth of May,
eighteen hundred and forty-seven, a solitary traveller. His appearance
was such that he might have been the very genius or demon of the
region. An observer would have found it difficult to say whether he was
nearer to forty or to sixty. His face was lean and haggard, and the
brown parchment-like skin was drawn tightly over the projecting bones;
his long, brown hair and beard were all flecked and dashed with white;
his eyes were sunken in his head, and burned with an unnatural lustre;
while the hand which grasped his rifle was hardly more fleshy than that
of a skeleton. As he stood, he leaned upon his weapon for support, and
yet his tall figure and the massive framework of his bones suggested a
wiry and vigorous constitution. His gaunt face, however, and his
clothes, which hung so baggily over his shrivelled limbs, proclaimed
what it was that gave him that senile and decrepit appearance. The man
was dying—dying from hunger and from thirst.

He had toiled painfully down the ravine, and on to this little
elevation, in the vain hope of seeing some signs of water. Now the
great salt plain stretched before his eyes, and the distant belt of
savage mountains, without a sign anywhere of plant or tree, which might
indicate the presence of moisture. In all that broad landscape there
was no gleam of hope. North, and east, and west he looked with wild
questioning eyes, and then he realised that his wanderings had come to
an end, and that there, on that barren crag, he was about to die. “Why
not here, as well as in a feather bed, twenty years hence,” he
muttered, as he seated himself in the shelter of a boulder.

Before sitting down, he had deposited upon the ground his useless
rifle, and also a large bundle tied up in a grey shawl, which he had
carried slung over his right shoulder. It appeared to be somewhat too
heavy for his strength, for in lowering it, it came down on the ground
with some little violence. Instantly there broke from the grey parcel a
little moaning cry, and from it there protruded a small, scared face,
with very bright brown eyes, and two little speckled, dimpled fists.

“You’ve hurt me!” said a childish voice reproachfully.

“Have I though,” the man answered penitently, “I didn’t go for to do
it.” As he spoke he unwrapped the grey shawl and extricated a pretty
little girl of about five years of age, whose dainty shoes and smart
pink frock with its little linen apron all bespoke a mother’s care. The
child was pale and wan, but her healthy arms and legs showed that she
had suffered less than her companion.

“How is it now?” he answered anxiously, for she was still rubbing the
towsy golden curls which covered the back of her head.

“Kiss it and make it well,” she said, with perfect gravity, showing the
injured part up to him. “That’s what mother used to do. Where’s
mother?”

“Mother’s gone. I guess you’ll see her before long.”

“Gone, eh!” said the little girl. “Funny, she didn’t say good-bye; she
‘most always did if she was just goin’ over to Auntie’s for tea, and
now she’s been away three days. Say, it’s awful dry, ain’t it? Ain’t
there no water, nor nothing to eat?”

“No, there ain’t nothing, dearie. You’ll just need to be patient
awhile, and then you’ll be all right. Put your head up agin me like
that, and then you’ll feel bullier. It ain’t easy to talk when your
lips is like leather, but I guess I’d best let you know how the cards
lie. What’s that you’ve got?”

“Pretty things! fine things!” cried the little girl enthusiastically,
holding up two glittering fragments of mica. “When we goes back to home
I’ll give them to brother Bob.”

“You’ll see prettier things than them soon,” said the man confidently.
“You just wait a bit. I was going to tell you though—you remember when
we left the river?”

“Oh, yes.”

“Well, we reckoned we’d strike another river soon, d’ye see. But there
was somethin’ wrong; compasses, or map, or somethin’, and it didn’t
turn up. Water ran out. Just except a little drop for the likes of you
and—and——”

“And you couldn’t wash yourself,” interrupted his companion gravely,
staring up at his grimy visage.

“No, nor drink. And Mr. Bender, he was the fust to go, and then Indian
Pete, and then Mrs. McGregor, and then Johnny Hones, and then, dearie,
your mother.”

“Then mother’s a deader too,” cried the little girl dropping her face
in her pinafore and sobbing bitterly.

“Yes, they all went except you and me. Then I thought there was some
chance of water in this direction, so I heaved you over my shoulder and
we tramped it together. It don’t seem as though we’ve improved matters.
There’s an almighty small chance for us now!”

“Do you mean that we are going to die too?” asked the child, checking
her sobs, and raising her tear-stained face.

“I guess that’s about the size of it.”

“Why didn’t you say so before?” she said, laughing gleefully. “You gave
me such a fright. Why, of course, now as long as we die we’ll be with
mother again.”

“Yes, you will, dearie.”

“And you too. I’ll tell her how awful good you’ve been. I’ll bet she
meets us at the door of Heaven with a big pitcher of water, and a lot
of buckwheat cakes, hot, and toasted on both sides, like Bob and me was
fond of. How long will it be first?”

“I don’t know—not very long.” The man’s eyes were fixed upon the
northern horizon. In the blue vault of the heaven there had appeared
three little specks which increased in size every moment, so rapidly
did they approach. They speedily resolved themselves into three large
brown birds, which circled over the heads of the two wanderers, and
then settled upon some rocks which overlooked them. They were buzzards,
the vultures of the west, whose coming is the forerunner of death.

“Cocks and hens,” cried the little girl gleefully, pointing at their
ill-omened forms, and clapping her hands to make them rise. “Say, did
God make this country?”

“In course He did,” said her companion, rather startled by this
unexpected question.

“He made the country down in Illinois, and He made the Missouri,” the
little girl continued. “I guess somebody else made the country in these
parts. It’s not nearly so well done. They forgot the water and the
trees.”

“What would ye think of offering up prayer?” the man asked diffidently.

“It ain’t night yet,” she answered.

“It don’t matter. It ain’t quite regular, but He won’t mind that, you
bet. You say over them ones that you used to say every night in the
waggon when we was on the Plains.”

“Why don’t you say some yourself?” the child asked, with wondering
eyes.

“I disremember them,” he answered. “I hain’t said none since I was half
the height o’ that gun. I guess it’s never too late. You say them out,
and I’ll stand by and come in on the choruses.”

“Then you’ll need to kneel down, and me too,” she said, laying the
shawl out for that purpose. “You’ve got to put your hands up like this.
It makes you feel kind o’ good.”

It was a strange sight had there been anything but the buzzards to see
it. Side by side on the narrow shawl knelt the two wanderers, the
little prattling child and the reckless, hardened adventurer. Her
chubby face, and his haggard, angular visage were both turned up to the
cloudless heaven in heartfelt entreaty to that dread being with whom
they were face to face, while the two voices—the one thin and clear,
the other deep and harsh—united in the entreaty for mercy and
forgiveness. The prayer finished, they resumed their seat in the shadow
of the boulder until the child fell asleep, nestling upon the broad
breast of her protector. He watched over her slumber for some time, but
Nature proved to be too strong for him. For three days and three nights
he had allowed himself neither rest nor repose. Slowly the eyelids
drooped over the tired eyes, and the head sunk lower and lower upon the
breast, until the man’s grizzled beard was mixed with the gold tresses
of his companion, and both slept the same deep and dreamless slumber.

Had the wanderer remained awake for another half hour a strange sight
would have met his eyes. Far away on the extreme verge of the alkali
plain there rose up a little spray of dust, very slight at first, and
hardly to be distinguished from the mists of the distance, but
gradually growing higher and broader until it formed a solid,
well-defined cloud. This cloud continued to increase in size until it
became evident that it could only be raised by a great multitude of
moving creatures. In more fertile spots the observer would have come to
the conclusion that one of those great herds of bisons which graze upon
the prairie land was approaching him. This was obviously impossible in
these arid wilds. As the whirl of dust drew nearer to the solitary
bluff upon which the two castaways were reposing, the canvas-covered
tilts of waggons and the figures of armed horsemen began to show up
through the haze, and the apparition revealed itself as being a great
caravan upon its journey for the West. But what a caravan! When the
head of it had reached the base of the mountains, the rear was not yet
visible on the horizon. Right across the enormous plain stretched the
straggling array, waggons and carts, men on horseback, and men on foot.
Innumerable women who staggered along under burdens, and children who
toddled beside the waggons or peeped out from under the white
coverings. This was evidently no ordinary party of immigrants, but
rather some nomad people who had been compelled from stress of
circumstances to seek themselves a new country. There rose through the
clear air a confused clattering and rumbling from this great mass of
humanity, with the creaking of wheels and the neighing of horses. Loud
as it was, it was not sufficient to rouse the two tired wayfarers above
them.

At the head of the column there rode a score or more of grave ironfaced
men, clad in sombre homespun garments and armed with rifles. On
reaching the base of the bluff they halted, and held a short council
among themselves.

“The wells are to the right, my brothers,” said one, a hard-lipped,
clean-shaven man with grizzly hair.

“To the right of the Sierra Blanco—so we shall reach the Rio Grande,”
said another.

“Fear not for water,” cried a third. “He who could draw it from the
rocks will not now abandon His own chosen people.”

“Amen! Amen!” responded the whole party.

They were about to resume their journey when one of the youngest and
keenest-eyed uttered an exclamation and pointed up at the rugged crag
above them. From its summit there fluttered a little wisp of pink,
showing up hard and bright against the grey rocks behind. At the sight
there was a general reining up of horses and unslinging of guns, while
fresh horsemen came galloping up to reinforce the vanguard. The word
‘Redskins’ was on every lip.

“There can’t be any number of Injuns here,” said the elderly man who
appeared to be in command. “We have passed the Pawnees, and there are
no other tribes until we cross the great mountains.”

“Shall I go forward and see, Brother Stangerson,” asked one of the
band.

“And I,” “and I,” cried a dozen voices.

“Leave your horses below and we will await you here,” the Elder
answered. In a moment the young fellows had dismounted, fastened their
horses, and were ascending the precipitous slope which led up to the
object which had excited their curiosity. They advanced rapidly and
noiselessly, with the confidence and dexterity of practised scouts. The
watchers from the plain below could see them flit from rock to rock
until their figures stood out against the skyline. The young man who
had first given the alarm was leading them. Suddenly his followers saw
him throw up his hands, as though overcome with astonishment, and on
joining him they were affected in the same way by the sight which met
their eyes.

On the little plateau which crowned the barren hill there stood a
single giant boulder, and against this boulder there lay a tall man,
long-bearded and hard-featured, but of an excessive thinness. His
placid face and regular breathing showed that he was fast asleep.
Beside him lay a little child, with her round white arms encircling his
brown sinewy neck, and her golden haired head resting upon the breast
of his velveteen tunic. Her rosy lips were parted, showing the regular
line of snow-white teeth within, and a playful smile played over her
infantile features. Her plump little white legs terminating in white
socks and neat shoes with shining buckles, offered a strange contrast
to the long shrivelled members of her companion. On the ledge of rock
above this strange couple there stood three solemn buzzards, who, at
the sight of the new comers uttered raucous screams of disappointment
and flapped sullenly away.

The cries of the foul birds awoke the two sleepers who stared about
them in bewilderment. The man staggered to his feet and looked down
upon the plain which had been so desolate when sleep had overtaken him,
and which was now traversed by this enormous body of men and of beasts.
His face assumed an expression of incredulity as he gazed, and he
passed his boney hand over his eyes. “This is what they call delirium,
I guess,” he muttered. The child stood beside him, holding on to the
skirt of his coat, and said nothing but looked all round her with the
wondering questioning gaze of childhood.

The rescuing party were speedily able to convince the two castaways
that their appearance was no delusion. One of them seized the little
girl, and hoisted her upon his shoulder, while two others supported her
gaunt companion, and assisted him towards the waggons.

“My name is John Ferrier,” the wanderer explained; “me and that little
un are all that’s left o’ twenty-one people. The rest is all dead o’
thirst and hunger away down in the south.”

“Is she your child?” asked someone.

“I guess she is now,” the other cried, defiantly; “she’s mine ‘cause I
saved her. No man will take her from me. She’s Lucy Ferrier from this
day on. Who are you, though?” he continued, glancing with curiosity at
his stalwart, sunburned rescuers; “there seems to be a powerful lot of
ye.”

“Nigh upon ten thousand,” said one of the young men; “we are the
persecuted children of God—the chosen of the Angel Merona.”

“I never heard tell on him,” said the wanderer. “He appears to have
chosen a fair crowd of ye.”

“Do not jest at that which is sacred,” said the other sternly. “We are
of those who believe in those sacred writings, drawn in Egyptian
letters on plates of beaten gold, which were handed unto the holy
Joseph Smith at Palmyra. We have come from Nauvoo, in the State of
Illinois, where we had founded our temple. We have come to seek a
refuge from the violent man and from the godless, even though it be the
heart of the desert.”

The name of Nauvoo evidently recalled recollections to John Ferrier. “I
see,” he said, “you are the Mormons.”

“We are the Mormons,” answered his companions with one voice.

“And where are you going?”

“We do not know. The hand of God is leading us under the person of our
Prophet. You must come before him. He shall say what is to be done with
you.”

They had reached the base of the hill by this time, and were surrounded
by crowds of the pilgrims—pale-faced meek-looking women, strong
laughing children, and anxious earnest-eyed men. Many were the cries of
astonishment and of commiseration which arose from them when they
perceived the youth of one of the strangers and the destitution of the
other. Their escort did not halt, however, but pushed on, followed by a
great crowd of Mormons, until they reached a waggon, which was
conspicuous for its great size and for the gaudiness and smartness of
its appearance. Six horses were yoked to it, whereas the others were
furnished with two, or, at most, four a-piece. Beside the driver there
sat a man who could not have been more than thirty years of age, but
whose massive head and resolute expression marked him as a leader. He
was reading a brown-backed volume, but as the crowd approached he laid
it aside, and listened attentively to an account of the episode. Then
he turned to the two castaways.

“If we take you with us,” he said, in solemn words, “it can only be as
believers in our own creed. We shall have no wolves in our fold. Better
far that your bones should bleach in this wilderness than that you
should prove to be that little speck of decay which in time corrupts
the whole fruit. Will you come with us on these terms?”

“Guess I’ll come with you on any terms,” said Ferrier, with such
emphasis that the grave Elders could not restrain a smile. The leader
alone retained his stern, impressive expression.

“Take him, Brother Stangerson,” he said, “give him food and drink, and
the child likewise. Let it be your task also to teach him our holy
creed. We have delayed long enough. Forward! On, on to Zion!”

“On, on to Zion!” cried the crowd of Mormons, and the words rippled
down the long caravan, passing from mouth to mouth until they died away
in a dull murmur in the far distance. With a cracking of whips and a
creaking of wheels the great waggons got into motion, and soon the
whole caravan was winding along once more. The Elder to whose care the
two waifs had been committed, led them to his waggon, where a meal was
already awaiting them.

“You shall remain here,” he said. “In a few days you will have
recovered from your fatigues. In the meantime, remember that now and
for ever you are of our religion. Brigham Young has said it, and he has
spoken with the voice of Joseph Smith, which is the voice of God.”




CHAPTER II.
THE FLOWER OF UTAH.


This is not the place to commemorate the trials and privations endured
by the immigrant Mormons before they came to their final haven. From
the shores of the Mississippi to the western slopes of the Rocky
Mountains they had struggled on with a constancy almost unparalleled in
history. The savage man, and the savage beast, hunger, thirst, fatigue,
and disease—every impediment which Nature could place in the way, had
all been overcome with Anglo-Saxon tenacity. Yet the long journey and
the accumulated terrors had shaken the hearts of the stoutest among
them. There was not one who did not sink upon his knees in heartfelt
prayer when they saw the broad valley of Utah bathed in the sunlight
beneath them, and learned from the lips of their leader that this was
the promised land, and that these virgin acres were to be theirs for
evermore.

Young speedily proved himself to be a skilful administrator as well as
a resolute chief. Maps were drawn and charts prepared, in which the
future city was sketched out. All around farms were apportioned and
allotted in proportion to the standing of each individual. The
tradesman was put to his trade and the artisan to his calling. In the
town streets and squares sprang up, as if by magic. In the country
there was draining and hedging, planting and clearing, until the next
summer saw the whole country golden with the wheat crop. Everything
prospered in the strange settlement. Above all, the great temple which
they had erected in the centre of the city grew ever taller and larger.
From the first blush of dawn until the closing of the twilight, the
clatter of the hammer and the rasp of the saw was never absent from the
monument which the immigrants erected to Him who had led them safe
through many dangers.

The two castaways, John Ferrier and the little girl who had shared his
fortunes and had been adopted as his daughter, accompanied the Mormons
to the end of their great pilgrimage. Little Lucy Ferrier was borne
along pleasantly enough in Elder Stangerson’s waggon, a retreat which
she shared with the Mormon’s three wives and with his son, a headstrong
forward boy of twelve. Having rallied, with the elasticity of
childhood, from the shock caused by her mother’s death, she soon became
a pet with the women, and reconciled herself to this new life in her
moving canvas-covered home. In the meantime Ferrier having recovered
from his privations, distinguished himself as a useful guide and an
indefatigable hunter. So rapidly did he gain the esteem of his new
companions, that when they reached the end of their wanderings, it was
unanimously agreed that he should be provided with as large and as
fertile a tract of land as any of the settlers, with the exception of
Young himself, and of Stangerson, Kemball, Johnston, and Drebber, who
were the four principal Elders.

On the farm thus acquired John Ferrier built himself a substantial
log-house, which received so many additions in succeeding years that it
grew into a roomy villa. He was a man of a practical turn of mind, keen
in his dealings and skilful with his hands. His iron constitution
enabled him to work morning and evening at improving and tilling his
lands. Hence it came about that his farm and all that belonged to him
prospered exceedingly. In three years he was better off than his
neighbours, in six he was well-to-do, in nine he was rich, and in
twelve there were not half a dozen men in the whole of Salt Lake City
who could compare with him. From the great inland sea to the distant
Wahsatch Mountains there was no name better known than that of John
Ferrier.

There was one way and only one in which he offended the
susceptibilities of his co-religionists. No argument or persuasion
could ever induce him to set up a female establishment after the manner
of his companions. He never gave reasons for this persistent refusal,
but contented himself by resolutely and inflexibly adhering to his
determination. There were some who accused him of lukewarmness in his
adopted religion, and others who put it down to greed of wealth and
reluctance to incur expense. Others, again, spoke of some early love
affair, and of a fair-haired girl who had pined away on the shores of
the Atlantic. Whatever the reason, Ferrier remained strictly celibate.
In every other respect he conformed to the religion of the young
settlement, and gained the name of being an orthodox and
straight-walking man.

Lucy Ferrier grew up within the log-house, and assisted her adopted
father in all his undertakings. The keen air of the mountains and the
balsamic odour of the pine trees took the place of nurse and mother to
the young girl. As year succeeded to year she grew taller and stronger,
her cheek more rudy, and her step more elastic. Many a wayfarer upon
the high road which ran by Ferrier’s farm felt long-forgotten thoughts
revive in their mind as they watched her lithe girlish figure tripping
through the wheatfields, or met her mounted upon her father’s mustang,
and managing it with all the ease and grace of a true child of the
West. So the bud blossomed into a flower, and the year which saw her
father the richest of the farmers left her as fair a specimen of
American girlhood as could be found in the whole Pacific slope.

It was not the father, however, who first discovered that the child had
developed into the woman. It seldom is in such cases. That mysterious
change is too subtle and too gradual to be measured by dates. Least of
all does the maiden herself know it until the tone of a voice or the
touch of a hand sets her heart thrilling within her, and she learns,
with a mixture of pride and of fear, that a new and a larger nature has
awoken within her. There are few who cannot recall that day and
remember the one little incident which heralded the dawn of a new life.
In the case of Lucy Ferrier the occasion was serious enough in itself,
apart from its future influence on her destiny and that of many
besides.

It was a warm June morning, and the Latter Day Saints were as busy as
the bees whose hive they have chosen for their emblem. In the fields
and in the streets rose the same hum of human industry. Down the dusty
high roads defiled long streams of heavily-laden mules, all heading to
the west, for the gold fever had broken out in California, and the
Overland Route lay through the City of the Elect. There, too, were
droves of sheep and bullocks coming in from the outlying pasture lands,
and trains of tired immigrants, men and horses equally weary of their
interminable journey. Through all this motley assemblage, threading her
way with the skill of an accomplished rider, there galloped Lucy
Ferrier, her fair face flushed with the exercise and her long chestnut
hair floating out behind her. She had a commission from her father in
the City, and was dashing in as she had done many a time before, with
all the fearlessness of youth, thinking only of her task and how it was
to be performed. The travel-stained adventurers gazed after her in
astonishment, and even the unemotional Indians, journeying in with
their pelties, relaxed their accustomed stoicism as they marvelled at
the beauty of the pale-faced maiden.

She had reached the outskirts of the city when she found the road
blocked by a great drove of cattle, driven by a half-dozen wild-looking
herdsmen from the plains. In her impatience she endeavoured to pass
this obstacle by pushing her horse into what appeared to be a gap.
Scarcely had she got fairly into it, however, before the beasts closed
in behind her, and she found herself completely imbedded in the moving
stream of fierce-eyed, long-horned bullocks. Accustomed as she was to
deal with cattle, she was not alarmed at her situation, but took
advantage of every opportunity to urge her horse on in the hopes of
pushing her way through the cavalcade. Unfortunately the horns of one
of the creatures, either by accident or design, came in violent contact
with the flank of the mustang, and excited it to madness. In an instant
it reared up upon its hind legs with a snort of rage, and pranced and
tossed in a way that would have unseated any but a most skilful rider.
The situation was full of peril. Every plunge of the excited horse
brought it against the horns again, and goaded it to fresh madness. It
was all that the girl could do to keep herself in the saddle, yet a
slip would mean a terrible death under the hoofs of the unwieldy and
terrified animals. Unaccustomed to sudden emergencies, her head began
to swim, and her grip upon the bridle to relax. Choked by the rising
cloud of dust and by the steam from the struggling creatures, she might
have abandoned her efforts in despair, but for a kindly voice at her
elbow which assured her of assistance. At the same moment a sinewy
brown hand caught the frightened horse by the curb, and forcing a way
through the drove, soon brought her to the outskirts.

“You’re not hurt, I hope, miss,” said her preserver, respectfully.

She looked up at his dark, fierce face, and laughed saucily. “I’m awful
frightened,” she said, naively; “whoever would have thought that Poncho
would have been so scared by a lot of cows?”

“Thank God you kept your seat,” the other said earnestly. He was a
tall, savage-looking young fellow, mounted on a powerful roan horse,
and clad in the rough dress of a hunter, with a long rifle slung over
his shoulders. “I guess you are the daughter of John Ferrier,” he
remarked, “I saw you ride down from his house. When you see him, ask
him if he remembers the Jefferson Hopes of St. Louis. If he’s the same
Ferrier, my father and he were pretty thick.”

“Hadn’t you better come and ask yourself?” she asked, demurely.

The young fellow seemed pleased at the suggestion, and his dark eyes
sparkled with pleasure. “I’ll do so,” he said, “we’ve been in the
mountains for two months, and are not over and above in visiting
condition. He must take us as he finds us.”

“He has a good deal to thank you for, and so have I,” she answered,
“he’s awful fond of me. If those cows had jumped on me he’d have never
got over it.”

“Neither would I,” said her companion.

“You! Well, I don’t see that it would make much matter to you, anyhow.
You ain’t even a friend of ours.”

The young hunter’s dark face grew so gloomy over this remark that Lucy
Ferrier laughed aloud.

“There, I didn’t mean that,” she said; “of course, you are a friend
now. You must come and see us. Now I must push along, or father won’t
trust me with his business any more. Good-bye!”

“Good-bye,” he answered, raising his broad sombrero, and bending over
her little hand. She wheeled her mustang round, gave it a cut with her
riding-whip, and darted away down the broad road in a rolling cloud of
dust.

Young Jefferson Hope rode on with his companions, gloomy and taciturn.
He and they had been among the Nevada Mountains prospecting for silver,
and were returning to Salt Lake City in the hope of raising capital
enough to work some lodes which they had discovered. He had been as
keen as any of them upon the business until this sudden incident had
drawn his thoughts into another channel. The sight of the fair young
girl, as frank and wholesome as the Sierra breezes, had stirred his
volcanic, untamed heart to its very depths. When she had vanished from
his sight, he realized that a crisis had come in his life, and that
neither silver speculations nor any other questions could ever be of
such importance to him as this new and all-absorbing one. The love
which had sprung up in his heart was not the sudden, changeable fancy
of a boy, but rather the wild, fierce passion of a man of strong will
and imperious temper. He had been accustomed to succeed in all that he
undertook. He swore in his heart that he would not fail in this if
human effort and human perseverance could render him successful.

He called on John Ferrier that night, and many times again, until his
face was a familiar one at the farm-house. John, cooped up in the
valley, and absorbed in his work, had had little chance of learning the
news of the outside world during the last twelve years. All this
Jefferson Hope was able to tell him, and in a style which interested
Lucy as well as her father. He had been a pioneer in California, and
could narrate many a strange tale of fortunes made and fortunes lost in
those wild, halcyon days. He had been a scout too, and a trapper, a
silver explorer, and a ranchman. Wherever stirring adventures were to
be had, Jefferson Hope had been there in search of them. He soon became
a favourite with the old farmer, who spoke eloquently of his virtues.
On such occasions, Lucy was silent, but her blushing cheek and her
bright, happy eyes, showed only too clearly that her young heart was no
longer her own. Her honest father may not have observed these symptoms,
but they were assuredly not thrown away upon the man who had won her
affections.

It was a summer evening when he came galloping down the road and pulled
up at the gate. She was at the doorway, and came down to meet him. He
threw the bridle over the fence and strode up the pathway.

“I am off, Lucy,” he said, taking her two hands in his, and gazing
tenderly down into her face; “I won’t ask you to come with me now, but
will you be ready to come when I am here again?”

“And when will that be?” she asked, blushing and laughing.

“A couple of months at the outside. I will come and claim you then, my
darling. There’s no one who can stand between us.”

“And how about father?” she asked.

“He has given his consent, provided we get these mines working all
right. I have no fear on that head.”

“Oh, well; of course, if you and father have arranged it all, there’s
no more to be said,” she whispered, with her cheek against his broad
breast.

“Thank God!” he said, hoarsely, stooping and kissing her. “It is
settled, then. The longer I stay, the harder it will be to go. They are
waiting for me at the cañon. Good-bye, my own darling—good-bye. In two
months you shall see me.”

He tore himself from her as he spoke, and, flinging himself upon his
horse, galloped furiously away, never even looking round, as though
afraid that his resolution might fail him if he took one glance at what
he was leaving. She stood at the gate, gazing after him until he
vanished from her sight. Then she walked back into the house, the
happiest girl in all Utah.




CHAPTER III.
JOHN FERRIER TALKS WITH THE PROPHET.


Three weeks had passed since Jefferson Hope and his comrades had
departed from Salt Lake City. John Ferrier’s heart was sore within him
when he thought of the young man’s return, and of the impending loss of
his adopted child. Yet her bright and happy face reconciled him to the
arrangement more than any argument could have done. He had always
determined, deep down in his resolute heart, that nothing would ever
induce him to allow his daughter to wed a Mormon. Such a marriage he
regarded as no marriage at all, but as a shame and a disgrace. Whatever
he might think of the Mormon doctrines, upon that one point he was
inflexible. He had to seal his mouth on the subject, however, for to
express an unorthodox opinion was a dangerous matter in those days in
the Land of the Saints.

Yes, a dangerous matter—so dangerous that even the most saintly dared
only whisper their religious opinions with bated breath, lest something
which fell from their lips might be misconstrued, and bring down a
swift retribution upon them. The victims of persecution had now turned
persecutors on their own account, and persecutors of the most terrible
description. Not the Inquisition of Seville, nor the German
Vehm-gericht, nor the Secret Societies of Italy, were ever able to put
a more formidable machinery in motion than that which cast a cloud over
the State of Utah.

Its invisibility, and the mystery which was attached to it, made this
organization doubly terrible. It appeared to be omniscient and
omnipotent, and yet was neither seen nor heard. The man who held out
against the Church vanished away, and none knew whither he had gone or
what had befallen him. His wife and his children awaited him at home,
but no father ever returned to tell them how he had fared at the hands
of his secret judges. A rash word or a hasty act was followed by
annihilation, and yet none knew what the nature might be of this
terrible power which was suspended over them. No wonder that men went
about in fear and trembling, and that even in the heart of the
wilderness they dared not whisper the doubts which oppressed them.

At first this vague and terrible power was exercised only upon the
recalcitrants who, having embraced the Mormon faith, wished afterwards
to pervert or to abandon it. Soon, however, it took a wider range. The
supply of adult women was running short, and polygamy without a female
population on which to draw was a barren doctrine indeed. Strange
rumours began to be bandied about—rumours of murdered immigrants and
rifled camps in regions where Indians had never been seen. Fresh women
appeared in the harems of the Elders—women who pined and wept, and bore
upon their faces the traces of an unextinguishable horror. Belated
wanderers upon the mountains spoke of gangs of armed men, masked,
stealthy, and noiseless, who flitted by them in the darkness. These
tales and rumours took substance and shape, and were corroborated and
re-corroborated, until they resolved themselves into a definite name.
To this day, in the lonely ranches of the West, the name of the Danite
Band, or the Avenging Angels, is a sinister and an ill-omened one.

Fuller knowledge of the organization which produced such terrible
results served to increase rather than to lessen the horror which it
inspired in the minds of men. None knew who belonged to this ruthless
society. The names of the participators in the deeds of blood and
violence done under the name of religion were kept profoundly secret.
The very friend to whom you communicated your misgivings as to the
Prophet and his mission, might be one of those who would come forth at
night with fire and sword to exact a terrible reparation. Hence every
man feared his neighbour, and none spoke of the things which were
nearest his heart.

One fine morning, John Ferrier was about to set out to his wheatfields,
when he heard the click of the latch, and, looking through the window,
saw a stout, sandy-haired, middle-aged man coming up the pathway. His
heart leapt to his mouth, for this was none other than the great
Brigham Young himself. Full of trepidation—for he knew that such a
visit boded him little good—Ferrier ran to the door to greet the Mormon
chief. The latter, however, received his salutations coldly, and
followed him with a stern face into the sitting-room.

“Brother Ferrier,” he said, taking a seat, and eyeing the farmer keenly
from under his light-coloured eyelashes, “the true believers have been
good friends to you. We picked you up when you were starving in the
desert, we shared our food with you, led you safe to the Chosen Valley,
gave you a goodly share of land, and allowed you to wax rich under our
protection. Is not this so?”

“It is so,” answered John Ferrier.

“In return for all this we asked but one condition: that was, that you
should embrace the true faith, and conform in every way to its usages.
This you promised to do, and this, if common report says truly, you
have neglected.”

“And how have I neglected it?” asked Ferrier, throwing out his hands in
expostulation. “Have I not given to the common fund? Have I not
attended at the Temple? Have I not——?”

“Where are your wives?” asked Young, looking round him. “Call them in,
that I may greet them.”

“It is true that I have not married,” Ferrier answered. “But women were
few, and there were many who had better claims than I. I was not a
lonely man: I had my daughter to attend to my wants.”

“It is of that daughter that I would speak to you,” said the leader of
the Mormons. “She has grown to be the flower of Utah, and has found
favour in the eyes of many who are high in the land.”

John Ferrier groaned internally.

“There are stories of her which I would fain disbelieve—stories that
she is sealed to some Gentile. This must be the gossip of idle tongues.
What is the thirteenth rule in the code of the sainted Joseph Smith?
‘Let every maiden of the true faith marry one of the elect; for if she
wed a Gentile, she commits a grievous sin.’ This being so, it is
impossible that you, who profess the holy creed, should suffer your
daughter to violate it.”

John Ferrier made no answer, but he played nervously with his
riding-whip.

“Upon this one point your whole faith shall be tested—so it has been
decided in the Sacred Council of Four. The girl is young, and we would
not have her wed grey hairs, neither would we deprive her of all
choice. We Elders have many heifers,[1] but our children must also be
provided. Stangerson has a son, and Drebber has a son, and either of
them would gladly welcome your daughter to their house. Let her choose
between them. They are young and rich, and of the true faith. What say
you to that?”

    [1] Heber C. Kemball, in one of his sermons, alludes to his hundred
    wives under this endearing epithet.

Ferrier remained silent for some little time with his brows knitted.

“You will give us time,” he said at last. “My daughter is very
young—she is scarce of an age to marry.”

“She shall have a month to choose,” said Young, rising from his seat.
“At the end of that time she shall give her answer.”

He was passing through the door, when he turned, with flushed face and
flashing eyes. “It were better for you, John Ferrier,” he thundered,
“that you and she were now lying blanched skeletons upon the Sierra
Blanco, than that you should put your weak wills against the orders of
the Holy Four!”

With a threatening gesture of his hand, he turned from the door, and
Ferrier heard his heavy step scrunching along the shingly path.

He was still sitting with his elbows upon his knees, considering how he
should broach the matter to his daughter when a soft hand was laid upon
his, and looking up, he saw her standing beside him. One glance at her
pale, frightened face showed him that she had heard what had passed.

“I could not help it,” she said, in answer to his look. “His voice rang
through the house. Oh, father, father, what shall we do?”

“Don’t you scare yourself,” he answered, drawing her to him, and
passing his broad, rough hand caressingly over her chestnut hair.
“We’ll fix it up somehow or another. You don’t find your fancy kind o’
lessening for this chap, do you?”

A sob and a squeeze of his hand was her only answer.

“No; of course not. I shouldn’t care to hear you say you did. He’s a
likely lad, and he’s a Christian, which is more than these folk here,
in spite o’ all their praying and preaching. There’s a party starting
for Nevada to-morrow, and I’ll manage to send him a message letting him
know the hole we are in. If I know anything o’ that young man, he’ll be
back here with a speed that would whip electro-telegraphs.”

Lucy laughed through her tears at her father’s description.

“When he comes, he will advise us for the best. But it is for you that
I am frightened, dear. One hears—one hears such dreadful stories about
those who oppose the Prophet: something terrible always happens to
them.”

“But we haven’t opposed him yet,” her father answered. “It will be time
to look out for squalls when we do. We have a clear month before us; at
the end of that, I guess we had best shin out of Utah.”

“Leave Utah!”

“That’s about the size of it.”

“But the farm?”

“We will raise as much as we can in money, and let the rest go. To tell
the truth, Lucy, it isn’t the first time I have thought of doing it. I
don’t care about knuckling under to any man, as these folk do to their
darned prophet. I’m a free-born American, and it’s all new to me. Guess
I’m too old to learn. If he comes browsing about this farm, he might
chance to run up against a charge of buckshot travelling in the
opposite direction.”

“But they won’t let us leave,” his daughter objected.

“Wait till Jefferson comes, and we’ll soon manage that. In the
meantime, don’t you fret yourself, my dearie, and don’t get your eyes
swelled up, else he’ll be walking into me when he sees you. There’s
nothing to be afeared about, and there’s no danger at all.”

John Ferrier uttered these consoling remarks in a very confident tone,
but she could not help observing that he paid unusual care to the
fastening of the doors that night, and that he carefully cleaned and
loaded the rusty old shotgun which hung upon the wall of his bedroom.




CHAPTER IV.
A FLIGHT FOR LIFE.


On the morning which followed his interview with the Mormon Prophet,
John Ferrier went in to Salt Lake City, and having found his
acquaintance, who was bound for the Nevada Mountains, he entrusted him
with his message to Jefferson Hope. In it he told the young man of the
imminent danger which threatened them, and how necessary it was that he
should return. Having done thus he felt easier in his mind, and
returned home with a lighter heart.

As he approached his farm, he was surprised to see a horse hitched to
each of the posts of the gate. Still more surprised was he on entering
to find two young men in possession of his sitting-room. One, with a
long pale face, was leaning back in the rocking-chair, with his feet
cocked up upon the stove. The other, a bull-necked youth with coarse
bloated features, was standing in front of the window with his hands in
his pocket, whistling a popular hymn. Both of them nodded to Ferrier as
he entered, and the one in the rocking-chair commenced the
conversation.

“Maybe you don’t know us,” he said. “This here is the son of Elder
Drebber, and I’m Joseph Stangerson, who travelled with you in the
desert when the Lord stretched out His hand and gathered you into the
true fold.”

“As He will all the nations in His own good time,” said the other in a
nasal voice; “He grindeth slowly but exceeding small.”

John Ferrier bowed coldly. He had guessed who his visitors were.

“We have come,” continued Stangerson, “at the advice of our fathers to
solicit the hand of your daughter for whichever of us may seem good to
you and to her. As I have but four wives and Brother Drebber here has
seven, it appears to me that my claim is the stronger one.”

“Nay, nay, Brother Stangerson,” cried the other; “the question is not
how many wives we have, but how many we can keep. My father has now
given over his mills to me, and I am the richer man.”

“But my prospects are better,” said the other, warmly. “When the Lord
removes my father, I shall have his tanning yard and his leather
factory. Then I am your elder, and am higher in the Church.”

“It will be for the maiden to decide,” rejoined young Drebber, smirking
at his own reflection in the glass. “We will leave it all to her
decision.”

During this dialogue, John Ferrier had stood fuming in the doorway,
hardly able to keep his riding-whip from the backs of his two visitors.

“Look here,” he said at last, striding up to them, “when my daughter
summons you, you can come, but until then I don’t want to see your
faces again.”

The two young Mormons stared at him in amazement. In their eyes this
competition between them for the maiden’s hand was the highest of
honours both to her and her father.

“There are two ways out of the room,” cried Ferrier; “there is the
door, and there is the window. Which do you care to use?”

His brown face looked so savage, and his gaunt hands so threatening,
that his visitors sprang to their feet and beat a hurried retreat. The
old farmer followed them to the door.

“Let me know when you have settled which it is to be,” he said,
sardonically.

“You shall smart for this!” Stangerson cried, white with rage. “You
have defied the Prophet and the Council of Four. You shall rue it to
the end of your days.”

“The hand of the Lord shall be heavy upon you,” cried young Drebber;
“He will arise and smite you!”

“Then I’ll start the smiting,” exclaimed Ferrier furiously, and would
have rushed upstairs for his gun had not Lucy seized him by the arm and
restrained him. Before he could escape from her, the clatter of horses’
hoofs told him that they were beyond his reach.

“The young canting rascals!” he exclaimed, wiping the perspiration from
his forehead; “I would sooner see you in your grave, my girl, than the
wife of either of them.”

“And so should I, father,” she answered, with spirit; “but Jefferson
will soon be here.”

“Yes. It will not be long before he comes. The sooner the better, for
we do not know what their next move may be.”

It was, indeed, high time that someone capable of giving advice and
help should come to the aid of the sturdy old farmer and his adopted
daughter. In the whole history of the settlement there had never been
such a case of rank disobedience to the authority of the Elders. If
minor errors were punished so sternly, what would be the fate of this
arch rebel. Ferrier knew that his wealth and position would be of no
avail to him. Others as well known and as rich as himself had been
spirited away before now, and their goods given over to the Church. He
was a brave man, but he trembled at the vague, shadowy terrors which
hung over him. Any known danger he could face with a firm lip, but this
suspense was unnerving. He concealed his fears from his daughter,
however, and affected to make light of the whole matter, though she,
with the keen eye of love, saw plainly that he was ill at ease.

He expected that he would receive some message or remonstrance from
Young as to his conduct, and he was not mistaken, though it came in an
unlooked-for manner. Upon rising next morning he found, to his
surprise, a small square of paper pinned on to the coverlet of his bed
just over his chest. On it was printed, in bold straggling letters:—

“Twenty-nine days are given you for amendment, and then——”

The dash was more fear-inspiring than any threat could have been. How
this warning came into his room puzzled John Ferrier sorely, for his
servants slept in an outhouse, and the doors and windows had all been
secured. He crumpled the paper up and said nothing to his daughter, but
the incident struck a chill into his heart. The twenty-nine days were
evidently the balance of the month which Young had promised. What
strength or courage could avail against an enemy armed with such
mysterious powers? The hand which fastened that pin might have struck
him to the heart, and he could never have known who had slain him.

Still more shaken was he next morning. They had sat down to their
breakfast when Lucy with a cry of surprise pointed upwards. In the
centre of the ceiling was scrawled, with a burned stick apparently, the
number 28. To his daughter it was unintelligible, and he did not
enlighten her. That night he sat up with his gun and kept watch and
ward. He saw and he heard nothing, and yet in the morning a great 27
had been painted upon the outside of his door.

Thus day followed day; and as sure as morning came he found that his
unseen enemies had kept their register, and had marked up in some
conspicuous position how many days were still left to him out of the
month of grace. Sometimes the fatal numbers appeared upon the walls,
sometimes upon the floors, occasionally they were on small placards
stuck upon the garden gate or the railings. With all his vigilance John
Ferrier could not discover whence these daily warnings proceeded. A
horror which was almost superstitious came upon him at the sight of
them. He became haggard and restless, and his eyes had the troubled
look of some hunted creature. He had but one hope in life now, and that
was for the arrival of the young hunter from Nevada.

Twenty had changed to fifteen and fifteen to ten, but there was no news
of the absentee. One by one the numbers dwindled down, and still there
came no sign of him. Whenever a horseman clattered down the road, or a
driver shouted at his team, the old farmer hurried to the gate thinking
that help had arrived at last. At last, when he saw five give way to
four and that again to three, he lost heart, and abandoned all hope of
escape. Single-handed, and with his limited knowledge of the mountains
which surrounded the settlement, he knew that he was powerless. The
more-frequented roads were strictly watched and guarded, and none could
pass along them without an order from the Council. Turn which way he
would, there appeared to be no avoiding the blow which hung over him.
Yet the old man never wavered in his resolution to part with life
itself before he consented to what he regarded as his daughter’s
dishonour.

He was sitting alone one evening pondering deeply over his troubles,
and searching vainly for some way out of them. That morning had shown
the figure 2 upon the wall of his house, and the next day would be the
last of the allotted time. What was to happen then? All manner of vague
and terrible fancies filled his imagination. And his daughter—what was
to become of her after he was gone? Was there no escape from the
invisible network which was drawn all round them. He sank his head upon
the table and sobbed at the thought of his own impotence.

What was that? In the silence he heard a gentle scratching sound—low,
but very distinct in the quiet of the night. It came from the door of
the house. Ferrier crept into the hall and listened intently. There was
a pause for a few moments, and then the low insidious sound was
repeated. Someone was evidently tapping very gently upon one of the
panels of the door. Was it some midnight assassin who had come to carry
out the murderous orders of the secret tribunal? Or was it some agent
who was marking up that the last day of grace had arrived. John Ferrier
felt that instant death would be better than the suspense which shook
his nerves and chilled his heart. Springing forward he drew the bolt
and threw the door open.

Outside all was calm and quiet. The night was fine, and the stars were
twinkling brightly overhead. The little front garden lay before the
farmer’s eyes bounded by the fence and gate, but neither there nor on
the road was any human being to be seen. With a sigh of relief, Ferrier
looked to right and to left, until happening to glance straight down at
his own feet he saw to his astonishment a man lying flat upon his face
upon the ground, with arms and legs all asprawl.

So unnerved was he at the sight that he leaned up against the wall with
his hand to his throat to stifle his inclination to call out. His first
thought was that the prostrate figure was that of some wounded or dying
man, but as he watched it he saw it writhe along the ground and into
the hall with the rapidity and noiselessness of a serpent. Once within
the house the man sprang to his feet, closed the door, and revealed to
the astonished farmer the fierce face and resolute expression of
Jefferson Hope.

“Good God!” gasped John Ferrier. “How you scared me! Whatever made you
come in like that.”

“Give me food,” the other said, hoarsely. “I have had no time for bite
or sup for eight-and-forty hours.” He flung himself upon the cold meat
and bread which were still lying upon the table from his host’s supper,
and devoured it voraciously. “Does Lucy bear up well?” he asked, when
he had satisfied his hunger.

“Yes. She does not know the danger,” her father answered.

“That is well. The house is watched on every side. That is why I
crawled my way up to it. They may be darned sharp, but they’re not
quite sharp enough to catch a Washoe hunter.”

John Ferrier felt a different man now that he realized that he had a
devoted ally. He seized the young man’s leathery hand and wrung it
cordially. “You’re a man to be proud of,” he said. “There are not many
who would come to share our danger and our troubles.”

“You’ve hit it there, pard,” the young hunter answered. “I have a
respect for you, but if you were alone in this business I’d think twice
before I put my head into such a hornet’s nest. It’s Lucy that brings
me here, and before harm comes on her I guess there will be one less o’
the Hope family in Utah.”

“What are we to do?”

“To-morrow is your last day, and unless you act to-night you are lost.
I have a mule and two horses waiting in the Eagle Ravine. How much
money have you?”

“Two thousand dollars in gold, and five in notes.”

“That will do. I have as much more to add to it. We must push for
Carson City through the mountains. You had best wake Lucy. It is as
well that the servants do not sleep in the house.”

While Ferrier was absent, preparing his daughter for the approaching
journey, Jefferson Hope packed all the eatables that he could find into
a small parcel, and filled a stoneware jar with water, for he knew by
experience that the mountain wells were few and far between. He had
hardly completed his arrangements before the farmer returned with his
daughter all dressed and ready for a start. The greeting between the
lovers was warm, but brief, for minutes were precious, and there was
much to be done.

“We must make our start at once,” said Jefferson Hope, speaking in a
low but resolute voice, like one who realizes the greatness of the
peril, but has steeled his heart to meet it. “The front and back
entrances are watched, but with caution we may get away through the
side window and across the fields. Once on the road we are only two
miles from the Ravine where the horses are waiting. By daybreak we
should be half-way through the mountains.”

“What if we are stopped,” asked Ferrier.

Hope slapped the revolver butt which protruded from the front of his
tunic. “If they are too many for us we shall take two or three of them
with us,” he said with a sinister smile.

The lights inside the house had all been extinguished, and from the
darkened window Ferrier peered over the fields which had been his own,
and which he was now about to abandon for ever. He had long nerved
himself to the sacrifice, however, and the thought of the honour and
happiness of his daughter outweighed any regret at his ruined fortunes.
All looked so peaceful and happy, the rustling trees and the broad
silent stretch of grain-land, that it was difficult to realize that the
spirit of murder lurked through it all. Yet the white face and set
expression of the young hunter showed that in his approach to the house
he had seen enough to satisfy him upon that head.

Ferrier carried the bag of gold and notes, Jefferson Hope had the
scanty provisions and water, while Lucy had a small bundle containing a
few of her more valued possessions. Opening the window very slowly and
carefully, they waited until a dark cloud had somewhat obscured the
night, and then one by one passed through into the little garden. With
bated breath and crouching figures they stumbled across it, and gained
the shelter of the hedge, which they skirted until they came to the gap
which opened into the cornfields. They had just reached this point when
the young man seized his two companions and dragged them down into the
shadow, where they lay silent and trembling.

It was as well that his prairie training had given Jefferson Hope the
ears of a lynx. He and his friends had hardly crouched down before the
melancholy hooting of a mountain owl was heard within a few yards of
them, which was immediately answered by another hoot at a small
distance. At the same moment a vague shadowy figure emerged from the
gap for which they had been making, and uttered the plaintive signal
cry again, on which a second man appeared out of the obscurity.

“To-morrow at midnight,” said the first who appeared to be in
authority. “When the Whip-poor-Will calls three times.”

“It is well,” returned the other. “Shall I tell Brother Drebber?”

“Pass it on to him, and from him to the others. Nine to seven!”

“Seven to five!” repeated the other, and the two figures flitted away
in different directions. Their concluding words had evidently been some
form of sign and countersign. The instant that their footsteps had died
away in the distance, Jefferson Hope sprang to his feet, and helping
his companions through the gap, led the way across the fields at the
top of his speed, supporting and half-carrying the girl when her
strength appeared to fail her.

“Hurry on! hurry on!” he gasped from time to time. “We are through the
line of sentinels. Everything depends on speed. Hurry on!”

Once on the high road they made rapid progress. Only once did they meet
anyone, and then they managed to slip into a field, and so avoid
recognition. Before reaching the town the hunter branched away into a
rugged and narrow footpath which led to the mountains. Two dark jagged
peaks loomed above them through the darkness, and the defile which led
between them was the Eagle Cañon in which the horses were awaiting
them. With unerring instinct Jefferson Hope picked his way among the
great boulders and along the bed of a dried-up watercourse, until he
came to the retired corner, screened with rocks, where the faithful
animals had been picketed. The girl was placed upon the mule, and old
Ferrier upon one of the horses, with his money-bag, while Jefferson
Hope led the other along the precipitous and dangerous path.

It was a bewildering route for anyone who was not accustomed to face
Nature in her wildest moods. On the one side a great crag towered up a
thousand feet or more, black, stern, and menacing, with long basaltic
columns upon its rugged surface like the ribs of some petrified
monster. On the other hand a wild chaos of boulders and debris made all
advance impossible. Between the two ran the irregular track, so narrow
in places that they had to travel in Indian file, and so rough that
only practised riders could have traversed it at all. Yet in spite of
all dangers and difficulties, the hearts of the fugitives were light
within them, for every step increased the distance between them and the
terrible despotism from which they were flying.

They soon had a proof, however, that they were still within the
jurisdiction of the Saints. They had reached the very wildest and most
desolate portion of the pass when the girl gave a startled cry, and
pointed upwards. On a rock which overlooked the track, showing out dark
and plain against the sky, there stood a solitary sentinel. He saw them
as soon as they perceived him, and his military challenge of “Who goes
there?” rang through the silent ravine.

“Travellers for Nevada,” said Jefferson Hope, with his hand upon the
rifle which hung by his saddle.

They could see the lonely watcher fingering his gun, and peering down
at them as if dissatisfied at their reply.

“By whose permission?” he asked.

“The Holy Four,” answered Ferrier. His Mormon experiences had taught
him that that was the highest authority to which he could refer.

“Nine from seven,” cried the sentinel.

“Seven from five,” returned Jefferson Hope promptly, remembering the
countersign which he had heard in the garden.

“Pass, and the Lord go with you,” said the voice from above. Beyond his
post the path broadened out, and the horses were able to break into a
trot. Looking back, they could see the solitary watcher leaning upon
his gun, and knew that they had passed the outlying post of the chosen
people, and that freedom lay before them.




CHAPTER V.
THE AVENGING ANGELS.


All night their course lay through intricate defiles and over irregular
and rock-strewn paths. More than once they lost their way, but Hope’s
intimate knowledge of the mountains enabled them to regain the track
once more. When morning broke, a scene of marvellous though savage
beauty lay before them. In every direction the great snow-capped peaks
hemmed them in, peeping over each other’s shoulders to the far horizon.
So steep were the rocky banks on either side of them, that the larch
and the pine seemed to be suspended over their heads, and to need only
a gust of wind to come hurtling down upon them. Nor was the fear
entirely an illusion, for the barren valley was thickly strewn with
trees and boulders which had fallen in a similar manner. Even as they
passed, a great rock came thundering down with a hoarse rattle which
woke the echoes in the silent gorges, and startled the weary horses
into a gallop.

As the sun rose slowly above the eastern horizon, the caps of the great
mountains lit up one after the other, like lamps at a festival, until
they were all ruddy and glowing. The magnificent spectacle cheered the
hearts of the three fugitives and gave them fresh energy. At a wild
torrent which swept out of a ravine they called a halt and watered
their horses, while they partook of a hasty breakfast. Lucy and her
father would fain have rested longer, but Jefferson Hope was
inexorable. “They will be upon our track by this time,” he said.
“Everything depends upon our speed. Once safe in Carson we may rest for
the remainder of our lives.”

During the whole of that day they struggled on through the defiles, and
by evening they calculated that they were more than thirty miles from
their enemies. At night-time they chose the base of a beetling crag,
where the rocks offered some protection from the chill wind, and there
huddled together for warmth, they enjoyed a few hours’ sleep. Before
daybreak, however, they were up and on their way once more. They had
seen no signs of any pursuers, and Jefferson Hope began to think that
they were fairly out of the reach of the terrible organization whose
enmity they had incurred. He little knew how far that iron grasp could
reach, or how soon it was to close upon them and crush them.

About the middle of the second day of their flight their scanty store
of provisions began to run out. This gave the hunter little uneasiness,
however, for there was game to be had among the mountains, and he had
frequently before had to depend upon his rifle for the needs of life.
Choosing a sheltered nook, he piled together a few dried branches and
made a blazing fire, at which his companions might warm themselves, for
they were now nearly five thousand feet above the sea level, and the
air was bitter and keen. Having tethered the horses, and bade Lucy
adieu, he threw his gun over his shoulder, and set out in search of
whatever chance might throw in his way. Looking back he saw the old man
and the young girl crouching over the blazing fire, while the three
animals stood motionless in the back-ground. Then the intervening rocks
hid them from his view.

He walked for a couple of miles through one ravine after another
without success, though from the marks upon the bark of the trees, and
other indications, he judged that there were numerous bears in the
vicinity. At last, after two or three hours’ fruitless search, he was
thinking of turning back in despair, when casting his eyes upwards he
saw a sight which sent a thrill of pleasure through his heart. On the
edge of a jutting pinnacle, three or four hundred feet above him, there
stood a creature somewhat resembling a sheep in appearance, but armed
with a pair of gigantic horns. The big-horn—for so it is called—was
acting, probably, as a guardian over a flock which were invisible to
the hunter; but fortunately it was heading in the opposite direction,
and had not perceived him. Lying on his face, he rested his rifle upon
a rock, and took a long and steady aim before drawing the trigger. The
animal sprang into the air, tottered for a moment upon the edge of the
precipice, and then came crashing down into the valley beneath.

The creature was too unwieldy to lift, so the hunter contented himself
with cutting away one haunch and part of the flank. With this trophy
over his shoulder, he hastened to retrace his steps, for the evening
was already drawing in. He had hardly started, however, before he
realized the difficulty which faced him. In his eagerness he had
wandered far past the ravines which were known to him, and it was no
easy matter to pick out the path which he had taken. The valley in
which he found himself divided and sub-divided into many gorges, which
were so like each other that it was impossible to distinguish one from
the other. He followed one for a mile or more until he came to a
mountain torrent which he was sure that he had never seen before.
Convinced that he had taken the wrong turn, he tried another, but with
the same result. Night was coming on rapidly, and it was almost dark
before he at last found himself in a defile which was familiar to him.
Even then it was no easy matter to keep to the right track, for the
moon had not yet risen, and the high cliffs on either side made the
obscurity more profound. Weighed down with his burden, and weary from
his exertions, he stumbled along, keeping up his heart by the
reflection that every step brought him nearer to Lucy, and that he
carried with him enough to ensure them food for the remainder of their
journey.

He had now come to the mouth of the very defile in which he had left
them. Even in the darkness he could recognize the outline of the cliffs
which bounded it. They must, he reflected, be awaiting him anxiously,
for he had been absent nearly five hours. In the gladness of his heart
he put his hands to his mouth and made the glen re-echo to a loud
halloo as a signal that he was coming. He paused and listened for an
answer. None came save his own cry, which clattered up the dreary
silent ravines, and was borne back to his ears in countless
repetitions. Again he shouted, even louder than before, and again no
whisper came back from the friends whom he had left such a short time
ago. A vague, nameless dread came over him, and he hurried onwards
frantically, dropping the precious food in his agitation.

When he turned the corner, he came full in sight of the spot where the
fire had been lit. There was still a glowing pile of wood ashes there,
but it had evidently not been tended since his departure. The same dead
silence still reigned all round. With his fears all changed to
convictions, he hurried on. There was no living creature near the
remains of the fire: animals, man, maiden, all were gone. It was only
too clear that some sudden and terrible disaster had occurred during
his absence—a disaster which had embraced them all, and yet had left no
traces behind it.

Bewildered and stunned by this blow, Jefferson Hope felt his head spin
round, and had to lean upon his rifle to save himself from falling. He
was essentially a man of action, however, and speedily recovered from
his temporary impotence. Seizing a half-consumed piece of wood from the
smouldering fire, he blew it into a flame, and proceeded with its help
to examine the little camp. The ground was all stamped down by the feet
of horses, showing that a large party of mounted men had overtaken the
fugitives, and the direction of their tracks proved that they had
afterwards turned back to Salt Lake City. Had they carried back both of
his companions with them? Jefferson Hope had almost persuaded himself
that they must have done so, when his eye fell upon an object which
made every nerve of his body tingle within him. A little way on one
side of the camp was a low-lying heap of reddish soil, which had
assuredly not been there before. There was no mistaking it for anything
but a newly-dug grave. As the young hunter approached it, he perceived
that a stick had been planted on it, with a sheet of paper stuck in the
cleft fork of it. The inscription upon the paper was brief, but to the
point:


JOHN FERRIER,
FORMERLY OF SALT LAKE CITY,
Died August 4th, 1860.


The sturdy old man, whom he had left so short a time before, was gone,
then, and this was all his epitaph. Jefferson Hope looked wildly round
to see if there was a second grave, but there was no sign of one. Lucy
had been carried back by their terrible pursuers to fulfil her original
destiny, by becoming one of the harem of the Elder’s son. As the young
fellow realized the certainty of her fate, and his own powerlessness to
prevent it, he wished that he, too, was lying with the old farmer in
his last silent resting-place.

Again, however, his active spirit shook off the lethargy which springs
from despair. If there was nothing else left to him, he could at least
devote his life to revenge. With indomitable patience and perseverance,
Jefferson Hope possessed also a power of sustained vindictiveness,
which he may have learned from the Indians amongst whom he had lived.
As he stood by the desolate fire, he felt that the only one thing which
could assuage his grief would be thorough and complete retribution,
brought by his own hand upon his enemies. His strong will and untiring
energy should, he determined, be devoted to that one end. With a grim,
white face, he retraced his steps to where he had dropped the food, and
having stirred up the smouldering fire, he cooked enough to last him
for a few days. This he made up into a bundle, and, tired as he was, he
set himself to walk back through the mountains upon the track of the
avenging angels.

For five days he toiled footsore and weary through the defiles which he
had already traversed on horseback. At night he flung himself down
among the rocks, and snatched a few hours of sleep; but before daybreak
he was always well on his way. On the sixth day, he reached the Eagle
Cañon, from which they had commenced their ill-fated flight. Thence he
could look down upon the home of the saints. Worn and exhausted, he
leaned upon his rifle and shook his gaunt hand fiercely at the silent
widespread city beneath him. As he looked at it, he observed that there
were flags in some of the principal streets, and other signs of
festivity. He was still speculating as to what this might mean when he
heard the clatter of horse’s hoofs, and saw a mounted man riding
towards him. As he approached, he recognized him as a Mormon named
Cowper, to whom he had rendered services at different times. He
therefore accosted him when he got up to him, with the object of
finding out what Lucy Ferrier’s fate had been.

“I am Jefferson Hope,” he said. “You remember me.”

The Mormon looked at him with undisguised astonishment—indeed, it was
difficult to recognize in this tattered, unkempt wanderer, with ghastly
white face and fierce, wild eyes, the spruce young hunter of former
days. Having, however, at last, satisfied himself as to his identity,
the man’s surprise changed to consternation.

“You are mad to come here,” he cried. “It is as much as my own life is
worth to be seen talking with you. There is a warrant against you from
the Holy Four for assisting the Ferriers away.”

“I don’t fear them, or their warrant,” Hope said, earnestly. “You must
know something of this matter, Cowper. I conjure you by everything you
hold dear to answer a few questions. We have always been friends. For
God’s sake, don’t refuse to answer me.”

“What is it?” the Mormon asked uneasily. “Be quick. The very rocks have
ears and the trees eyes.”

“What has become of Lucy Ferrier?”

“She was married yesterday to young Drebber. Hold up, man, hold up, you
have no life left in you.”

“Don’t mind me,” said Hope faintly. He was white to the very lips, and
had sunk down on the stone against which he had been leaning. “Married,
you say?”

“Married yesterday—that’s what those flags are for on the Endowment
House. There was some words between young Drebber and young Stangerson
as to which was to have her. They’d both been in the party that
followed them, and Stangerson had shot her father, which seemed to give
him the best claim; but when they argued it out in council, Drebber’s
party was the stronger, so the Prophet gave her over to him. No one
won’t have her very long though, for I saw death in her face yesterday.
She is more like a ghost than a woman. Are you off, then?”

“Yes, I am off,” said Jefferson Hope, who had risen from his seat. His
face might have been chiselled out of marble, so hard and set was its
expression, while its eyes glowed with a baleful light.

“Where are you going?”

“Never mind,” he answered; and, slinging his weapon over his shoulder,
strode off down the gorge and so away into the heart of the mountains
to the haunts of the wild beasts. Amongst them all there was none so
fierce and so dangerous as himself.

The prediction of the Mormon was only too well fulfilled. Whether it
was the terrible death of her father or the effects of the hateful
marriage into which she had been forced, poor Lucy never held up her
head again, but pined away and died within a month. Her sottish
husband, who had married her principally for the sake of John Ferrier’s
property, did not affect any great grief at his bereavement; but his
other wives mourned over her, and sat up with her the night before the
burial, as is the Mormon custom. They were grouped round the bier in
the early hours of the morning, when, to their inexpressible fear and
astonishment, the door was flung open, and a savage-looking,
weather-beaten man in tattered garments strode into the room. Without a
glance or a word to the cowering women, he walked up to the white
silent figure which had once contained the pure soul of Lucy Ferrier.
Stooping over her, he pressed his lips reverently to her cold forehead,
and then, snatching up her hand, he took the wedding-ring from her
finger. “She shall not be buried in that,” he cried with a fierce
snarl, and before an alarm could be raised sprang down the stairs and
was gone. So strange and so brief was the episode, that the watchers
might have found it hard to believe it themselves or persuade other
people of it, had it not been for the undeniable fact that the circlet
of gold which marked her as having been a bride had disappeared.

For some months Jefferson Hope lingered among the mountains, leading a
strange wild life, and nursing in his heart the fierce desire for
vengeance which possessed him. Tales were told in the City of the weird
figure which was seen prowling about the suburbs, and which haunted the
lonely mountain gorges. Once a bullet whistled through Stangerson’s
window and flattened itself upon the wall within a foot of him. On
another occasion, as Drebber passed under a cliff a great boulder
crashed down on him, and he only escaped a terrible death by throwing
himself upon his face. The two young Mormons were not long in
discovering the reason of these attempts upon their lives, and led
repeated expeditions into the mountains in the hope of capturing or
killing their enemy, but always without success. Then they adopted the
precaution of never going out alone or after nightfall, and of having
their houses guarded. After a time they were able to relax these
measures, for nothing was either heard or seen of their opponent, and
they hoped that time had cooled his vindictiveness.

Far from doing so, it had, if anything, augmented it. The hunter’s mind
was of a hard, unyielding nature, and the predominant idea of revenge
had taken such complete possession of it that there was no room for any
other emotion. He was, however, above all things practical. He soon
realized that even his iron constitution could not stand the incessant
strain which he was putting upon it. Exposure and want of wholesome
food were wearing him out. If he died like a dog among the mountains,
what was to become of his revenge then? And yet such a death was sure
to overtake him if he persisted. He felt that that was to play his
enemy’s game, so he reluctantly returned to the old Nevada mines, there
to recruit his health and to amass money enough to allow him to pursue
his object without privation.

His intention had been to be absent a year at the most, but a
combination of unforeseen circumstances prevented his leaving the mines
for nearly five. At the end of that time, however, his memory of his
wrongs and his craving for revenge were quite as keen as on that
memorable night when he had stood by John Ferrier’s grave. Disguised,
and under an assumed name, he returned to Salt Lake City, careless what
became of his own life, as long as he obtained what he knew to be
justice. There he found evil tidings awaiting him. There had been a
schism among the Chosen People a few months before, some of the younger
members of the Church having rebelled against the authority of the
Elders, and the result had been the secession of a certain number of
the malcontents, who had left Utah and become Gentiles. Among these had
been Drebber and Stangerson; and no one knew whither they had gone.
Rumour reported that Drebber had managed to convert a large part of his
property into money, and that he had departed a wealthy man, while his
companion, Stangerson, was comparatively poor. There was no clue at
all, however, as to their whereabouts.

Many a man, however vindictive, would have abandoned all thought of
revenge in the face of such a difficulty, but Jefferson Hope never
faltered for a moment. With the small competence he possessed, eked out
by such employment as he could pick up, he travelled from town to town
through the United States in quest of his enemies. Year passed into
year, his black hair turned grizzled, but still he wandered on, a human
bloodhound, with his mind wholly set upon the one object upon which he
had devoted his life. At last his perseverance was rewarded. It was but
a glance of a face in a window, but that one glance told him that
Cleveland in Ohio possessed the men whom he was in pursuit of. He
returned to his miserable lodgings with his plan of vengeance all
arranged. It chanced, however, that Drebber, looking from his window,
had recognized the vagrant in the street, and had read murder in his
eyes. He hurried before a justice of the peace, accompanied by
Stangerson, who had become his private secretary, and represented to
him that they were in danger of their lives from the jealousy and
hatred of an old rival. That evening Jefferson Hope was taken into
custody, and not being able to find sureties, was detained for some
weeks. When at last he was liberated, it was only to find that
Drebber’s house was deserted, and that he and his secretary had
departed for Europe.

Again the avenger had been foiled, and again his concentrated hatred
urged him to continue the pursuit. Funds were wanting, however, and for
some time he had to return to work, saving every dollar for his
approaching journey. At last, having collected enough to keep life in
him, he departed for Europe, and tracked his enemies from city to city,
working his way in any menial capacity, but never overtaking the
fugitives. When he reached St. Petersburg they had departed for Paris;
and when he followed them there he learned that they had just set off
for Copenhagen. At the Danish capital he was again a few days late, for
they had journeyed on to London, where he at last succeeded in running
them to earth. As to what occurred there, we cannot do better than
quote the old hunter’s own account, as duly recorded in Dr. Watson’s
Journal, to which we are already under such obligations.




CHAPTER VI.
A CONTINUATION OF THE REMINISCENCES OF JOHN WATSON, M.D.


Our prisoner’s furious resistance did not apparently indicate any
ferocity in his disposition towards ourselves, for on finding himself
powerless, he smiled in an affable manner, and expressed his hopes that
he had not hurt any of us in the scuffle. “I guess you’re going to take
me to the police-station,” he remarked to Sherlock Holmes. “My cab’s at
the door. If you’ll loose my legs I’ll walk down to it. I’m not so
light to lift as I used to be.”

Gregson and Lestrade exchanged glances as if they thought this
proposition rather a bold one; but Holmes at once took the prisoner at
his word, and loosened the towel which we had bound round his ankles.
He rose and stretched his legs, as though to assure himself that they
were free once more. I remember that I thought to myself, as I eyed
him, that I had seldom seen a more powerfully built man; and his dark
sunburned face bore an expression of determination and energy which was
as formidable as his personal strength.

“If there’s a vacant place for a chief of the police, I reckon you are
the man for it,” he said, gazing with undisguised admiration at my
fellow-lodger. “The way you kept on my trail was a caution.”

“You had better come with me,” said Holmes to the two detectives.

“I can drive you,” said Lestrade.

“Good! and Gregson can come inside with me. You too, Doctor, you have
taken an interest in the case and may as well stick to us.”

I assented gladly, and we all descended together. Our prisoner made no
attempt at escape, but stepped calmly into the cab which had been his,
and we followed him. Lestrade mounted the box, whipped up the horse,
and brought us in a very short time to our destination. We were ushered
into a small chamber where a police Inspector noted down our prisoner’s
name and the names of the men with whose murder he had been charged.
The official was a white-faced unemotional man, who went through his
duties in a dull mechanical way. “The prisoner will be put before the
magistrates in the course of the week,” he said; “in the mean time, Mr.
Jefferson Hope, have you anything that you wish to say? I must warn you
that your words will be taken down, and may be used against you.”

“I’ve got a good deal to say,” our prisoner said slowly. “I want to
tell you gentlemen all about it.”

“Hadn’t you better reserve that for your trial?” asked the Inspector.

“I may never be tried,” he answered. “You needn’t look startled. It
isn’t suicide I am thinking of. Are you a Doctor?” He turned his fierce
dark eyes upon me as he asked this last question.

“Yes; I am,” I answered.

“Then put your hand here,” he said, with a smile, motioning with his
manacled wrists towards his chest.

I did so; and became at once conscious of an extraordinary throbbing
and commotion which was going on inside. The walls of his chest seemed
to thrill and quiver as a frail building would do inside when some
powerful engine was at work. In the silence of the room I could hear a
dull humming and buzzing noise which proceeded from the same source.

“Why,” I cried, “you have an aortic aneurism!”

“That’s what they call it,” he said, placidly. “I went to a Doctor last
week about it, and he told me that it is bound to burst before many
days passed. It has been getting worse for years. I got it from
over-exposure and under-feeding among the Salt Lake Mountains. I’ve
done my work now, and I don’t care how soon I go, but I should like to
leave some account of the business behind me. I don’t want to be
remembered as a common cut-throat.”

The Inspector and the two detectives had a hurried discussion as to the
advisability of allowing him to tell his story.

“Do you consider, Doctor, that there is immediate danger?” the former
asked.

“Most certainly there is,” I answered.

“In that case it is clearly our duty, in the interests of justice, to
take his statement,” said the Inspector. “You are at liberty, sir, to
give your account, which I again warn you will be taken down.”

“I’ll sit down, with your leave,” the prisoner said, suiting the action
to the word. “This aneurism of mine makes me easily tired, and the
tussle we had half an hour ago has not mended matters. I’m on the brink
of the grave, and I am not likely to lie to you. Every word I say is
the absolute truth, and how you use it is a matter of no consequence to
me.”

With these words, Jefferson Hope leaned back in his chair and began the
following remarkable statement. He spoke in a calm and methodical
manner, as though the events which he narrated were commonplace enough.
I can vouch for the accuracy of the subjoined account, for I have had
access to Lestrade’s note-book, in which the prisoner’s words were
taken down exactly as they were uttered.

“It don’t much matter to you why I hated these men,” he said; “it’s
enough that they were guilty of the death of two human beings—a father
and a daughter—and that they had, therefore, forfeited their own lives.
After the lapse of time that has passed since their crime, it was
impossible for me to secure a conviction against them in any court. I
knew of their guilt though, and I determined that I should be judge,
jury, and executioner all rolled into one. You’d have done the same, if
you have any manhood in you, if you had been in my place.

“That girl that I spoke of was to have married me twenty years ago. She
was forced into marrying that same Drebber, and broke her heart over
it. I took the marriage ring from her dead finger, and I vowed that his
dying eyes should rest upon that very ring, and that his last thoughts
should be of the crime for which he was punished. I have carried it
about with me, and have followed him and his accomplice over two
continents until I caught them. They thought to tire me out, but they
could not do it. If I die to-morrow, as is likely enough, I die knowing
that my work in this world is done, and well done. They have perished,
and by my hand. There is nothing left for me to hope for, or to desire.

“They were rich and I was poor, so that it was no easy matter for me to
follow them. When I got to London my pocket was about empty, and I
found that I must turn my hand to something for my living. Driving and
riding are as natural to me as walking, so I applied at a cabowner’s
office, and soon got employment. I was to bring a certain sum a week to
the owner, and whatever was over that I might keep for myself. There
was seldom much over, but I managed to scrape along somehow. The
hardest job was to learn my way about, for I reckon that of all the
mazes that ever were contrived, this city is the most confusing. I had
a map beside me though, and when once I had spotted the principal
hotels and stations, I got on pretty well.

“It was some time before I found out where my two gentlemen were
living; but I inquired and inquired until at last I dropped across
them. They were at a boarding-house at Camberwell, over on the other
side of the river. When once I found them out I knew that I had them at
my mercy. I had grown my beard, and there was no chance of their
recognizing me. I would dog them and follow them until I saw my
opportunity. I was determined that they should not escape me again.

“They were very near doing it for all that. Go where they would about
London, I was always at their heels. Sometimes I followed them on my
cab, and sometimes on foot, but the former was the best, for then they
could not get away from me. It was only early in the morning or late at
night that I could earn anything, so that I began to get behind hand
with my employer. I did not mind that, however, as long as I could lay
my hand upon the men I wanted.

“They were very cunning, though. They must have thought that there was
some chance of their being followed, for they would never go out alone,
and never after nightfall. During two weeks I drove behind them every
day, and never once saw them separate. Drebber himself was drunk half
the time, but Stangerson was not to be caught napping. I watched them
late and early, but never saw the ghost of a chance; but I was not
discouraged, for something told me that the hour had almost come. My
only fear was that this thing in my chest might burst a little too soon
and leave my work undone.

“At last, one evening I was driving up and down Torquay Terrace, as the
street was called in which they boarded, when I saw a cab drive up to
their door. Presently some luggage was brought out, and after a time
Drebber and Stangerson followed it, and drove off. I whipped up my
horse and kept within sight of them, feeling very ill at ease, for I
feared that they were going to shift their quarters. At Euston Station
they got out, and I left a boy to hold my horse, and followed them on
to the platform. I heard them ask for the Liverpool train, and the
guard answer that one had just gone and there would not be another for
some hours. Stangerson seemed to be put out at that, but Drebber was
rather pleased than otherwise. I got so close to them in the bustle
that I could hear every word that passed between them. Drebber said
that he had a little business of his own to do, and that if the other
would wait for him he would soon rejoin him. His companion remonstrated
with him, and reminded him that they had resolved to stick together.
Drebber answered that the matter was a delicate one, and that he must
go alone. I could not catch what Stangerson said to that, but the other
burst out swearing, and reminded him that he was nothing more than his
paid servant, and that he must not presume to dictate to him. On that
the Secretary gave it up as a bad job, and simply bargained with him
that if he missed the last train he should rejoin him at Halliday’s
Private Hotel; to which Drebber answered that he would be back on the
platform before eleven, and made his way out of the station.

“The moment for which I had waited so long had at last come. I had my
enemies within my power. Together they could protect each other, but
singly they were at my mercy. I did not act, however, with undue
precipitation. My plans were already formed. There is no satisfaction
in vengeance unless the offender has time to realize who it is that
strikes him, and why retribution has come upon him. I had my plans
arranged by which I should have the opportunity of making the man who
had wronged me understand that his old sin had found him out. It
chanced that some days before a gentleman who had been engaged in
looking over some houses in the Brixton Road had dropped the key of one
of them in my carriage. It was claimed that same evening, and returned;
but in the interval I had taken a moulding of it, and had a duplicate
constructed. By means of this I had access to at least one spot in this
great city where I could rely upon being free from interruption. How to
get Drebber to that house was the difficult problem which I had now to
solve.

“He walked down the road and went into one or two liquor shops, staying
for nearly half-an-hour in the last of them. When he came out he
staggered in his walk, and was evidently pretty well on. There was a
hansom just in front of me, and he hailed it. I followed it so close
that the nose of my horse was within a yard of his driver the whole
way. We rattled across Waterloo Bridge and through miles of streets,
until, to my astonishment, we found ourselves back in the Terrace in
which he had boarded. I could not imagine what his intention was in
returning there; but I went on and pulled up my cab a hundred yards or
so from the house. He entered it, and his hansom drove away. Give me a
glass of water, if you please. My mouth gets dry with the talking.”

I handed him the glass, and he drank it down.

“That’s better,” he said. “Well, I waited for a quarter of an hour, or
more, when suddenly there came a noise like people struggling inside
the house. Next moment the door was flung open and two men appeared,
one of whom was Drebber, and the other was a young chap whom I had
never seen before. This fellow had Drebber by the collar, and when they
came to the head of the steps he gave him a shove and a kick which sent
him half across the road. ‘You hound,’ he cried, shaking his stick at
him; ‘I’ll teach you to insult an honest girl!’ He was so hot that I
think he would have thrashed Drebber with his cudgel, only that the cur
staggered away down the road as fast as his legs would carry him. He
ran as far as the corner, and then, seeing my cab, he hailed me and
jumped in. ‘Drive me to Halliday’s Private Hotel,’ said he.

“When I had him fairly inside my cab, my heart jumped so with joy that
I feared lest at this last moment my aneurism might go wrong. I drove
along slowly, weighing in my own mind what it was best to do. I might
take him right out into the country, and there in some deserted lane
have my last interview with him. I had almost decided upon this, when
he solved the problem for me. The craze for drink had seized him again,
and he ordered me to pull up outside a gin palace. He went in, leaving
word that I should wait for him. There he remained until closing time,
and when he came out he was so far gone that I knew the game was in my
own hands.

“Don’t imagine that I intended to kill him in cold blood. It would only
have been rigid justice if I had done so, but I could not bring myself
to do it. I had long determined that he should have a show for his life
if he chose to take advantage of it. Among the many billets which I
have filled in America during my wandering life, I was once janitor and
sweeper out of the laboratory at York College. One day the professor
was lecturing on poisons, and he showed his students some alkaloid, as
he called it, which he had extracted from some South American arrow
poison, and which was so powerful that the least grain meant instant
death. I spotted the bottle in which this preparation was kept, and
when they were all gone, I helped myself to a little of it. I was a
fairly good dispenser, so I worked this alkaloid into small, soluble
pills, and each pill I put in a box with a similar pill made without
the poison. I determined at the time that when I had my chance, my
gentlemen should each have a draw out of one of these boxes, while I
ate the pill that remained. It would be quite as deadly, and a good
deal less noisy than firing across a handkerchief. From that day I had
always my pill boxes about with me, and the time had now come when I
was to use them.

“It was nearer one than twelve, and a wild, bleak night, blowing hard
and raining in torrents. Dismal as it was outside, I was glad within—so
glad that I could have shouted out from pure exultation. If any of you
gentlemen have ever pined for a thing, and longed for it during twenty
long years, and then suddenly found it within your reach, you would
understand my feelings. I lit a cigar, and puffed at it to steady my
nerves, but my hands were trembling, and my temples throbbing with
excitement. As I drove, I could see old John Ferrier and sweet Lucy
looking at me out of the darkness and smiling at me, just as plain as I
see you all in this room. All the way they were ahead of me, one on
each side of the horse until I pulled up at the house in the Brixton
Road.

“There was not a soul to be seen, nor a sound to be heard, except the
dripping of the rain. When I looked in at the window, I found Drebber
all huddled together in a drunken sleep. I shook him by the arm, ‘It’s
time to get out,’ I said.

“‘All right, cabby,’ said he.

“I suppose he thought we had come to the hotel that he had mentioned,
for he got out without another word, and followed me down the garden. I
had to walk beside him to keep him steady, for he was still a little
top-heavy. When we came to the door, I opened it, and led him into the
front room. I give you my word that all the way, the father and the
daughter were walking in front of us.

“‘It’s infernally dark,’ said he, stamping about.

“‘We’ll soon have a light,’ I said, striking a match and putting it to
a wax candle which I had brought with me. ‘Now, Enoch Drebber,’ I
continued, turning to him, and holding the light to my own face, ‘who
am I?’

“He gazed at me with bleared, drunken eyes for a moment, and then I saw
a horror spring up in them, and convulse his whole features, which
showed me that he knew me. He staggered back with a livid face, and I
saw the perspiration break out upon his brow, while his teeth chattered
in his head. At the sight, I leaned my back against the door and
laughed loud and long. I had always known that vengeance would be
sweet, but I had never hoped for the contentment of soul which now
possessed me.

“‘You dog!’ I said; ‘I have hunted you from Salt Lake City to St.
Petersburg, and you have always escaped me. Now, at last your
wanderings have come to an end, for either you or I shall never see
to-morrow’s sun rise.’ He shrunk still further away as I spoke, and I
could see on his face that he thought I was mad. So I was for the time.
The pulses in my temples beat like sledge-hammers, and I believe I
would have had a fit of some sort if the blood had not gushed from my
nose and relieved me.

“‘What do you think of Lucy Ferrier now?’ I cried, locking the door,
and shaking the key in his face. ‘Punishment has been slow in coming,
but it has overtaken you at last.’ I saw his coward lips tremble as I
spoke. He would have begged for his life, but he knew well that it was
useless.

“‘Would you murder me?’ he stammered.

“‘There is no murder,’ I answered. ‘Who talks of murdering a mad dog?
What mercy had you upon my poor darling, when you dragged her from her
slaughtered father, and bore her away to your accursed and shameless
harem.’

“‘It was not I who killed her father,’ he cried.

“‘But it was you who broke her innocent heart,’ I shrieked, thrusting
the box before him. ‘Let the high God judge between us. Choose and eat.
There is death in one and life in the other. I shall take what you
leave. Let us see if there is justice upon the earth, or if we are
ruled by chance.’

“He cowered away with wild cries and prayers for mercy, but I drew my
knife and held it to his throat until he had obeyed me. Then I
swallowed the other, and we stood facing one another in silence for a
minute or more, waiting to see which was to live and which was to die.
Shall I ever forget the look which came over his face when the first
warning pangs told him that the poison was in his system? I laughed as
I saw it, and held Lucy’s marriage ring in front of his eyes. It was
but for a moment, for the action of the alkaloid is rapid. A spasm of
pain contorted his features; he threw his hands out in front of him,
staggered, and then, with a hoarse cry, fell heavily upon the floor. I
turned him over with my foot, and placed my hand upon his heart. There
was no movement. He was dead!

“The blood had been streaming from my nose, but I had taken no notice
of it. I don’t know what it was that put it into my head to write upon
the wall with it. Perhaps it was some mischievous idea of setting the
police upon a wrong track, for I felt light-hearted and cheerful. I
remembered a German being found in New York with RACHE written up above
him, and it was argued at the time in the newspapers that the secret
societies must have done it. I guessed that what puzzled the New
Yorkers would puzzle the Londoners, so I dipped my finger in my own
blood and printed it on a convenient place on the wall. Then I walked
down to my cab and found that there was nobody about, and that the
night was still very wild. I had driven some distance when I put my
hand into the pocket in which I usually kept Lucy’s ring, and found
that it was not there. I was thunderstruck at this, for it was the only
memento that I had of her. Thinking that I might have dropped it when I
stooped over Drebber’s body, I drove back, and leaving my cab in a side
street, I went boldly up to the house—for I was ready to dare anything
rather than lose the ring. When I arrived there, I walked right into
the arms of a police-officer who was coming out, and only managed to
disarm his suspicions by pretending to be hopelessly drunk.

“That was how Enoch Drebber came to his end. All I had to do then was
to do as much for Stangerson, and so pay off John Ferrier’s debt. I
knew that he was staying at Halliday’s Private Hotel, and I hung about
all day, but he never came out. I fancy that he suspected something
when Drebber failed to put in an appearance. He was cunning, was
Stangerson, and always on his guard. If he thought he could keep me off
by staying indoors he was very much mistaken. I soon found out which
was the window of his bedroom, and early next morning I took advantage
of some ladders which were lying in the lane behind the hotel, and so
made my way into his room in the grey of the dawn. I woke him up and
told him that the hour had come when he was to answer for the life he
had taken so long before. I described Drebber’s death to him, and I
gave him the same choice of the poisoned pills. Instead of grasping at
the chance of safety which that offered him, he sprang from his bed and
flew at my throat. In self-defence I stabbed him to the heart. It would
have been the same in any case, for Providence would never have allowed
his guilty hand to pick out anything but the poison.

“I have little more to say, and it’s as well, for I am about done up. I
went on cabbing it for a day or so, intending to keep at it until I
could save enough to take me back to America. I was standing in the
yard when a ragged youngster asked if there was a cabby there called
Jefferson Hope, and said that his cab was wanted by a gentleman at
221B, Baker Street. I went round, suspecting no harm, and the next
thing I knew, this young man here had the bracelets on my wrists, and
as neatly shackled as ever I saw in my life. That’s the whole of my
story, gentlemen. You may consider me to be a murderer; but I hold that
I am just as much an officer of justice as you are.”

So thrilling had the man’s narrative been, and his manner was so
impressive that we had sat silent and absorbed. Even the professional
detectives, _blasé_ as they were in every detail of crime, appeared to
be keenly interested in the man’s story. When he finished we sat for
some minutes in a stillness which was only broken by the scratching of
Lestrade’s pencil as he gave the finishing touches to his shorthand
account.

“There is only one point on which I should like a little more
information,” Sherlock Holmes said at last. “Who was your accomplice
who came for the ring which I advertised?”

The prisoner winked at my friend jocosely. “I can tell my own secrets,”
he said, “but I don’t get other people into trouble. I saw your
advertisement, and I thought it might be a plant, or it might be the
ring which I wanted. My friend volunteered to go and see. I think
you’ll own he did it smartly.”

“Not a doubt of that,” said Holmes heartily.

“Now, gentlemen,” the Inspector remarked gravely, “the forms of the law
must be complied with. On Thursday the prisoner will be brought before
the magistrates, and your attendance will be required. Until then I
will be responsible for him.” He rang the bell as he spoke, and
Jefferson Hope was led off by a couple of warders, while my friend and
I made our way out of the Station and took a cab back to Baker Street.




CHAPTER VII.
THE CONCLUSION.


We had all been warned to appear before the magistrates upon the
Thursday; but when the Thursday came there was no occasion for our
testimony. A higher Judge had taken the matter in hand, and Jefferson
Hope had been summoned before a tribunal where strict justice would be
meted out to him. On the very night after his capture the aneurism
burst, and he was found in the morning stretched upon the floor of the
cell, with a placid smile upon his face, as though he had been able in
his dying moments to look back upon a useful life, and on work well
done.

“Gregson and Lestrade will be wild about his death,” Holmes remarked,
as we chatted it over next evening. “Where will their grand
advertisement be now?”

“I don’t see that they had very much to do with his capture,” I
answered.

“What you do in this world is a matter of no consequence,” returned my
companion, bitterly. “The question is, what can you make people believe
that you have done. Never mind,” he continued, more brightly, after a
pause. “I would not have missed the investigation for anything. There
has been no better case within my recollection. Simple as it was, there
were several most instructive points about it.”

“Simple!” I ejaculated.

“Well, really, it can hardly be described as otherwise,” said Sherlock
Holmes, smiling at my surprise. “The proof of its intrinsic simplicity
is, that without any help save a few very ordinary deductions I was
able to lay my hand upon the criminal within three days.”

“That is true,” said I.

“I have already explained to you that what is out of the common is
usually a guide rather than a hindrance. In solving a problem of this
sort, the grand thing is to be able to reason backwards. That is a very
useful accomplishment, and a very easy one, but people do not practise
it much. In the every-day affairs of life it is more useful to reason
forwards, and so the other comes to be neglected. There are fifty who
can reason synthetically for one who can reason analytically.”

“I confess,” said I, “that I do not quite follow you.”

“I hardly expected that you would. Let me see if I can make it clearer.
Most people, if you describe a train of events to them, will tell you
what the result would be. They can put those events together in their
minds, and argue from them that something will come to pass. There are
few people, however, who, if you told them a result, would be able to
evolve from their own inner consciousness what the steps were which led
up to that result. This power is what I mean when I talk of reasoning
backwards, or analytically.”

“I understand,” said I.

“Now this was a case in which you were given the result and had to find
everything else for yourself. Now let me endeavour to show you the
different steps in my reasoning. To begin at the beginning. I
approached the house, as you know, on foot, and with my mind entirely
free from all impressions. I naturally began by examining the roadway,
and there, as I have already explained to you, I saw clearly the marks
of a cab, which, I ascertained by inquiry, must have been there during
the night. I satisfied myself that it was a cab and not a private
carriage by the narrow gauge of the wheels. The ordinary London growler
is considerably less wide than a gentleman’s brougham.

“This was the first point gained. I then walked slowly down the garden
path, which happened to be composed of a clay soil, peculiarly suitable
for taking impressions. No doubt it appeared to you to be a mere
trampled line of slush, but to my trained eyes every mark upon its
surface had a meaning. There is no branch of detective science which is
so important and so much neglected as the art of tracing footsteps.
Happily, I have always laid great stress upon it, and much practice has
made it second nature to me. I saw the heavy footmarks of the
constables, but I saw also the track of the two men who had first
passed through the garden. It was easy to tell that they had been
before the others, because in places their marks had been entirely
obliterated by the others coming upon the top of them. In this way my
second link was formed, which told me that the nocturnal visitors were
two in number, one remarkable for his height (as I calculated from the
length of his stride), and the other fashionably dressed, to judge from
the small and elegant impression left by his boots.

“On entering the house this last inference was confirmed. My
well-booted man lay before me. The tall one, then, had done the murder,
if murder there was. There was no wound upon the dead man’s person, but
the agitated expression upon his face assured me that he had foreseen
his fate before it came upon him. Men who die from heart disease, or
any sudden natural cause, never by any chance exhibit agitation upon
their features. Having sniffed the dead man’s lips I detected a
slightly sour smell, and I came to the conclusion that he had had
poison forced upon him. Again, I argued that it had been forced upon
him from the hatred and fear expressed upon his face. By the method of
exclusion, I had arrived at this result, for no other hypothesis would
meet the facts. Do not imagine that it was a very unheard of idea. The
forcible administration of poison is by no means a new thing in
criminal annals. The cases of Dolsky in Odessa, and of Leturier in
Montpellier, will occur at once to any toxicologist.

“And now came the great question as to the reason why. Robbery had not
been the object of the murder, for nothing was taken. Was it politics,
then, or was it a woman? That was the question which confronted me. I
was inclined from the first to the latter supposition. Political
assassins are only too glad to do their work and to fly. This murder
had, on the contrary, been done most deliberately, and the perpetrator
had left his tracks all over the room, showing that he had been there
all the time. It must have been a private wrong, and not a political
one, which called for such a methodical revenge. When the inscription
was discovered upon the wall I was more inclined than ever to my
opinion. The thing was too evidently a blind. When the ring was found,
however, it settled the question. Clearly the murderer had used it to
remind his victim of some dead or absent woman. It was at this point
that I asked Gregson whether he had enquired in his telegram to
Cleveland as to any particular point in Mr. Drebber’s former career. He
answered, you remember, in the negative.

“I then proceeded to make a careful examination of the room, which
confirmed me in my opinion as to the murderer’s height, and furnished
me with the additional details as to the Trichinopoly cigar and the
length of his nails. I had already come to the conclusion, since there
were no signs of a struggle, that the blood which covered the floor had
burst from the murderer’s nose in his excitement. I could perceive that
the track of blood coincided with the track of his feet. It is seldom
that any man, unless he is very full-blooded, breaks out in this way
through emotion, so I hazarded the opinion that the criminal was
probably a robust and ruddy-faced man. Events proved that I had judged
correctly.

“Having left the house, I proceeded to do what Gregson had neglected. I
telegraphed to the head of the police at Cleveland, limiting my enquiry
to the circumstances connected with the marriage of Enoch Drebber. The
answer was conclusive. It told me that Drebber had already applied for
the protection of the law against an old rival in love, named Jefferson
Hope, and that this same Hope was at present in Europe. I knew now that
I held the clue to the mystery in my hand, and all that remained was to
secure the murderer.

“I had already determined in my own mind that the man who had walked
into the house with Drebber, was none other than the man who had driven
the cab. The marks in the road showed me that the horse had wandered on
in a way which would have been impossible had there been anyone in
charge of it. Where, then, could the driver be, unless he were inside
the house? Again, it is absurd to suppose that any sane man would carry
out a deliberate crime under the very eyes, as it were, of a third
person, who was sure to betray him. Lastly, supposing one man wished to
dog another through London, what better means could he adopt than to
turn cabdriver. All these considerations led me to the irresistible
conclusion that Jefferson Hope was to be found among the jarveys of the
Metropolis.

“If he had been one there was no reason to believe that he had ceased
to be. On the contrary, from his point of view, any sudden change would
be likely to draw attention to himself. He would, probably, for a time
at least, continue to perform his duties. There was no reason to
suppose that he was going under an assumed name. Why should he change
his name in a country where no one knew his original one? I therefore
organized my Street Arab detective corps, and sent them systematically
to every cab proprietor in London until they ferreted out the man that
I wanted. How well they succeeded, and how quickly I took advantage of
it, are still fresh in your recollection. The murder of Stangerson was
an incident which was entirely unexpected, but which could hardly in
any case have been prevented. Through it, as you know, I came into
possession of the pills, the existence of which I had already surmised.
You see the whole thing is a chain of logical sequences without a break
or flaw.”

“It is wonderful!” I cried. “Your merits should be publicly recognized.
You should publish an account of the case. If you won’t, I will for
you.”

“You may do what you like, Doctor,” he answered. “See here!” he
continued, handing a paper over to me, “look at this!”

It was the _Echo_ for the day, and the paragraph to which he pointed
was devoted to the case in question.

“The public,” it said, “have lost a sensational treat through the
sudden death of the man Hope, who was suspected of the murder of Mr.
Enoch Drebber and of Mr. Joseph Stangerson. The details of the case
will probably be never known now, though we are informed upon good
authority that the crime was the result of an old standing and romantic
feud, in which love and Mormonism bore a part. It seems that both the
victims belonged, in their younger days, to the Latter Day Saints, and
Hope, the deceased prisoner, hails also from Salt Lake City. If the
case has had no other effect, it, at least, brings out in the most
striking manner the efficiency of our detective police force, and will
serve as a lesson to all foreigners that they will do wisely to settle
their feuds at home, and not to carry them on to British soil. It is an
open secret that the credit of this smart capture belongs entirely to
the well-known Scotland Yard officials, Messrs. Lestrade and Gregson.
The man was apprehended, it appears, in the rooms of a certain Mr.
Sherlock Holmes, who has himself, as an amateur, shown some talent in
the detective line, and who, with such instructors, may hope in time to
attain to some degree of their skill. It is expected that a testimonial
of some sort will be presented to the two officers as a fitting
recognition of their services.”

“Didn’t I tell you so when we started?” cried Sherlock Holmes with a
laugh. “That’s the result of all our Study in Scarlet: to get them a
testimonial!”

“Never mind,” I answered, “I have all the facts in my journal, and the
public shall know them. In the meantime you must make yourself
contented by the consciousness of success, like the Roman miser—


“‘Populus me sibilat, at mihi plaudo
Ipse domi simul ac nummos contemplor in arca.’”


THE POISON BELT


BY

ARTHUR CONAN DOYLE




  Being an account of another adventure of
  Prof. George E. Challenger, Lord John Roxton,
  Prof. Summerlee, and Mr. E. D. Malone,
  the discoverers of "The Lost World"



TABLE OF CONTENTS

Chapter

   I  THE BLURRING OF LINES
  II  THE TIDE OF DEATH
 III  SUBMERGED
  IV  A DIARY OF THE DYING
   V  THE DEAD WORLD
  VI  THE GREAT AWAKENING




Chapter I

THE BLURRING OF LINES


It is imperative that now at once, while these stupendous events are
still clear in my mind, I should set them down with that exactness of
detail which time may blur.  But even as I do so, I am overwhelmed by the
wonder of the fact that it should be our little group of the "Lost
World"--Professor Challenger, Professor Summerlee, Lord John Roxton, and
myself--who have passed through this amazing experience.

When, some years ago, I chronicled in the Daily Gazette our epoch-making
journey in South America, I little thought that it should ever fall to my
lot to tell an even stranger personal experience, one which is unique in
all human annals and must stand out in the records of history as a great
peak among the humble foothills which surround it.  The event itself will
always be marvellous, but the circumstances that we four were together at
the time of this extraordinary episode came about in a most natural and,
indeed, inevitable fashion.  I will explain the events which led up to it
as shortly and as clearly as I can, though I am well aware that the
fuller the detail upon such a subject the more welcome it will be to the
reader, for the public curiosity has been and still is insatiable.

It was upon Friday, the twenty-seventh of August--a date forever
memorable in the history of the world--that I went down to the office of
my paper and asked for three days' leave of absence from Mr. McArdle, who
still presided over our news department.  The good old Scotchman shook
his head, scratched his dwindling fringe of ruddy fluff, and finally put
his reluctance into words.

"I was thinking, Mr. Malone, that we could employ you to advantage these
days.  I was thinking there was a story that you are the only man that
could handle as it should be handled."

"I am sorry for that," said I, trying to hide my disappointment.  "Of
course if I am needed, there is an end of the matter.  But the engagement
was important and intimate.  If I could be spared----"

"Well, I don't see that you can."

It was bitter, but I had to put the best face I could upon it.  After
all, it was my own fault, for I should have known by this time that a
journalist has no right to make plans of his own.

"Then I'll think no more of it," said I with as much cheerfulness as I
could assume at so short a notice.  "What was it that you wanted me to
do?"

"Well, it was just to interview that deevil of a man down at Rotherfield."

"You don't mean Professor Challenger?" I cried.

"Aye, it's just him that I do mean.  He ran young Alec Simpson of the
Courier a mile down the high road last week by the collar of his coat and
the slack of his breeches.  You'll have read of it, likely, in the police
report.  Our boys would as soon interview a loose alligator in the zoo.
But you could do it, I'm thinking--an old friend like you."

"Why," said I, greatly relieved, "this makes it all easy.  It so happens
that it was to visit Professor Challenger at Rotherfield that I was
asking for leave of absence.  The fact is, that it is the anniversary of
our main adventure on the plateau three years ago, and he has asked our
whole party down to his house to see him and celebrate the occasion."

"Capital!" cried McArdle, rubbing his hands and beaming through his
glasses.  "Then you will be able to get his opeenions out of him.  In any
other man I would say it was all moonshine, but the fellow has made good
once, and who knows but he may again!"

"Get what out of him?" I asked.  "What has he been doing?"

"Haven't you seen his letter on 'Scientific Possibeelities' in to-day's
Times?"

"No."

McArdle dived down and picked a copy from the floor.

"Read it aloud," said he, indicating a column with his finger.  "I'd be
glad to hear it again, for I am not sure now that I have the man's
meaning clear in my head."

This was the letter which I read to the news editor of the Gazette:--


"SCIENTIFIC POSSIBILITIES"

"Sir,--I have read with amusement, not wholly unmixed with some less
complimentary emotion, the complacent and wholly fatuous letter of James
Wilson MacPhail which has lately appeared in your columns upon the
subject of the blurring of Fraunhofer's lines in the spectra both of the
planets and of the fixed stars.  He dismisses the matter as of no
significance.  To a wider intelligence it may well seem of very great
possible importance--so great as to involve the ultimate welfare of every
man, woman, and child upon this planet.  I can hardly hope, by the use of
scientific language, to convey any sense of my meaning to those
ineffectual people who gather their ideas from the columns of a daily
newspaper.  I will endeavour, therefore, to condescend to their
limitation and to indicate the situation by the use of a homely analogy
which will be within the limits of the intelligence of your readers."


"Man, he's a wonder--a living wonder!" said McArdle, shaking his head
reflectively.  "He'd put up the feathers of a sucking-dove and set up a
riot in a Quakers' meeting.  No wonder he has made London too hot for
him.  It's a peety, Mr. Malone, for it's a grand brain!  We'll let's have
the analogy."

"We will suppose," I read, "that a small bundle of connected corks was
launched in a sluggish current upon a voyage across the Atlantic.  The
corks drift slowly on from day to day with the same conditions all round
them.  If the corks were sentient we could imagine that they would
consider these conditions to be permanent and assured.  But we, with our
superior knowledge, know that many things might happen to surprise the
corks.  They might possibly float up against a ship, or a sleeping whale,
or become entangled in seaweed.  In any case, their voyage would probably
end by their being thrown up on the rocky coast of Labrador.  But what
could they know of all this while they drifted so gently day by day in
what they thought was a limitless and homogeneous ocean?

"Your readers will possibly comprehend that the Atlantic, in this
parable, stands for the mighty ocean of ether through which we drift and
that the bunch of corks represents the little and obscure planetary
system to which we belong.  A third-rate sun, with its rag tag and
bobtail of insignificant satellites, we float under the same daily
conditions towards some unknown end, some squalid catastrophe which will
overwhelm us at the ultimate confines of space, where we are swept over
an etheric Niagara or dashed upon some unthinkable Labrador.  I see no
room here for the shallow and ignorant optimism of your correspondent,
Mr. James Wilson MacPhail, but many reasons why we should watch with a
very close and interested attention every indication of change in those
cosmic surroundings upon which our own ultimate fate may depend."

"Man, he'd have made a grand meenister," said McArdle.  "It just booms
like an organ.  Let's get doun to what it is that's troubling him."

"The general blurring and shifting of Fraunhofer's lines of the spectrum
point, in my opinion, to a widespread cosmic change of a subtle and
singular character.  Light from a planet is the reflected light of the
sun.  Light from a star is a self-produced light.  But the spectra both
from planets and stars have, in this instance, all undergone the same
change.  Is it, then, a change in those planets and stars?  To me such an
idea is inconceivable.  What common change could simultaneously come upon
them all?  Is it a change in our own atmosphere?  It is possible, but in
the highest degree improbable, since we see no signs of it around us, and
chemical analysis has failed to reveal it.  What, then, is the third
possibility?  That it may be a change in the conducting medium, in that
infinitely fine ether which extends from star to star and pervades the
whole universe.  Deep in that ocean we are floating upon a slow current.
Might that current not drift us into belts of ether which are novel and
have properties of which we have never conceived?  There is a change
somewhere.  This cosmic disturbance of the spectrum proves it.  It may be
a good change.  It may be an evil one.  It may be a neutral one.  We do
not know.  Shallow observers may treat the matter as one which can be
disregarded, but one who like myself is possessed of the deeper
intelligence of the true philosopher will understand that the
possibilities of the universe are incalculable and that the wisest man is
he who holds himself ready for the unexpected.  To take an obvious
example, who would undertake to say that the mysterious and universal
outbreak of illness, recorded in your columns this very morning as having
broken out among the indigenous races of Sumatra, has no connection with
some cosmic change to which they may respond more quickly than the more
complex peoples of Europe?  I throw out the idea for what it is worth.
To assert it is, in the present stage, as unprofitable as to deny it, but
it is an unimaginative numskull who is too dense to perceive that it is
well within the bounds of scientific possibility.

        "Yours faithfully,
             "GEORGE EDWARD CHALLENGER.

"THE BRIARS, ROTHERFIELD."


"It's a fine, steemulating letter," said McArdle thoughtfully, fitting a
cigarette into the long glass tube which he used as a holder.  "What's
your opeenion of it, Mr. Malone?"

I had to confess my total and humiliating ignorance of the subject at
issue.  What, for example, were Fraunhofer's lines?  McArdle had just
been studying the matter with the aid of our tame scientist at the
office, and he picked from his desk two of those many-coloured spectral
bands which bear a general resemblance to the hat-ribbons of some young
and ambitious cricket club.  He pointed out to me that there were certain
black lines which formed crossbars upon the series of brilliant colours
extending from the red at one end through gradations of orange, yellow,
green, blue, and indigo to the violet at the other.

"Those dark bands are Fraunhofer's lines," said he.  "The colours are
just light itself.  Every light, if you can split it up with a prism,
gives the same colours.  They tell us nothing.  It is the lines that
count, because they vary according to what it may be that produces the
light.  It is these lines that have been blurred instead of clear this
last week, and all the astronomers have been quarreling over the reason.
Here's a photograph of the blurred lines for our issue to-morrow.  The
public have taken no interest in the matter up to now, but this letter of
Challenger's in the Times will make them wake up, I'm thinking."

"And this about Sumatra?"

"Well, it's a long cry from a blurred line in a spectrum to a sick nigger
in Sumatra.  And yet the chiel has shown us once before that he knows
what he's talking about.  There is some queer illness down yonder, that's
beyond all doubt, and to-day there's a cable just come in from Singapore
that the lighthouses are out of action in the Straits of Sundan, and two
ships on the beach in consequence.  Anyhow, it's good enough for you to
interview Challenger upon.  If you get anything definite, let us have a
column by Monday."

I was coming out from the news editor's room, turning over my new mission
in my mind, when I heard my name called from the waiting-room below.  It
was a telegraph-boy with a wire which had been forwarded from my lodgings
at Streatham.  The message was from the very man we had been discussing,
and ran thus:--

Malone, 17, Hill Street, Streatham.--Bring oxygen.--Challenger.

"Bring oxygen!"  The Professor, as I remembered him, had an elephantine
sense of humour capable of the most clumsy and unwieldly gambollings.
Was this one of those jokes which used to reduce him to uproarious
laughter, when his eyes would disappear and he was all gaping mouth and
wagging beard, supremely indifferent to the gravity of all around him?  I
turned the words over, but could make nothing even remotely jocose out of
them.  Then surely it was a concise order--though a very strange one.  He
was the last man in the world whose deliberate command I should care to
disobey.  Possibly some chemical experiment was afoot; possibly----Well,
it was no business of mine to speculate upon why he wanted it.  I must
get it.  There was nearly an hour before I should catch the train at
Victoria.  I took a taxi, and having ascertained the address from the
telephone book, I made for the Oxygen Tube Supply Company in Oxford
Street.

As I alighted on the pavement at my destination, two youths emerged from
the door of the establishment carrying an iron cylinder, which, with some
trouble, they hoisted into a waiting motor-car.  An elderly man was at
their heels scolding and directing in a creaky, sardonic voice.  He
turned towards me.  There was no mistaking those austere features and
that goatee beard.  It was my old cross-grained companion, Professor
Summerlee.

"What!" he cried.  "Don't tell me that _you_ have had one of these
preposterous telegrams for oxygen?"

I exhibited it.

"Well, well!  I have had one too, and, as you see, very much against the
grain, I have acted upon it.  Our good friend is as impossible as ever.
The need for oxygen could not have been so urgent that he must desert the
usual means of supply and encroach upon the time of those who are really
busier than himself.  Why could he not order it direct?"

I could only suggest that he probably wanted it at once.

"Or thought he did, which is quite another matter.  But it is superfluous
now for you to purchase any, since I have this considerable supply."

"Still, for some reason he seems to wish that I should bring oxygen too.
It will be safer to do exactly what he tells me."

Accordingly, in spite of many grumbles and remonstrances from Summerlee,
I ordered an additional tube, which was placed with the other in his
motor-car, for he had offered me a lift to Victoria.

I turned away to pay off my taxi, the driver of which was very
cantankerous and abusive over his fare.  As I came back to Professor
Summerlee, he was having a furious altercation with the men who had
carried down the oxygen, his little white goat's beard jerking with
indignation.  One of the fellows called him, I remember, "a silly old
bleached cockatoo," which so enraged his chauffeur that he bounded out of
his seat to take the part of his insulted master, and it was all we could
do to prevent a riot in the street.

These little things may seem trivial to relate, and passed as mere
incidents at the time.  It is only now, as I look back, that I see their
relation to the whole story which I have to unfold.

The chauffeur must, as it seemed to me, have been a novice or else have
lost his nerve in this disturbance, for he drove vilely on the way to the
station.  Twice we nearly had collisions with other equally erratic
vehicles, and I remember remarking to Summerlee that the standard of
driving in London had very much declined.  Once we brushed the very edge
of a great crowd which was watching a fight at the corner of the Mall.
The people, who were much excited, raised cries of anger at the clumsy
driving, and one fellow sprang upon the step and waved a stick above our
heads.  I pushed him off, but we were glad when we had got clear of them
and safe out of the park.  These little events, coming one after the
other, left me very jangled in my nerves, and I could see from my
companion's petulant manner that his own patience had got to a low ebb.

But our good humour was restored when we saw Lord John Roxton waiting for
us upon the platform, his tall, thin figure clad in a yellow tweed
shooting-suit.  His keen face, with those unforgettable eyes, so fierce
and yet so humorous, flushed with pleasure at the sight of us.  His ruddy
hair was shot with grey, and the furrows upon his brow had been cut a
little deeper by Time's chisel, but in all else he was the Lord John who
had been our good comrade in the past.

"Hullo, Herr Professor!  Hullo, young fella!" he shouted as he came
toward us.

He roared with amusement when he saw the oxygen cylinders upon the
porter's trolly behind us.  "So you've got them too!" he cried.  "Mine is
in the van.  Whatever can the old dear be after?"

"Have you seen his letter in the Times?" I asked.

"What was it?"

"Stuff and nonsense!" said Summerlee harshly.

"Well, it's at the bottom of this oxygen business, or I am mistaken,"
said I.

"Stuff and nonsense!" cried Summerlee again with quite unnecessary
violence.  We had all got into a first-class smoker, and he had already
lit the short and charred old briar pipe which seemed to singe the end of
his long, aggressive nose.

"Friend Challenger is a clever man," said he with great vehemence.  "No
one can deny it.  It's a fool that denies it.  Look at his hat.  There's
a sixty-ounce brain inside it--a big engine, running smooth, and turning
out clean work.  Show me the engine-house and I'll tell you the size of
the engine.  But he is a born charlatan--you've heard me tell him so to
his face--a born charlatan, with a kind of dramatic trick of jumping into
the limelight.  Things are quiet, so friend Challenger sees a chance to
set the public talking about him.  You don't imagine that he seriously
believes all this nonsense about a change in the ether and a danger to
the human race?  Was ever such a cock-and-bull story in this life?"

He sat like an old white raven, croaking and shaking with sardonic
laughter.

A wave of anger passed through me as I listened to Summerlee.  It was
disgraceful that he should speak thus of the leader who had been the
source of all our fame and given us such an experience as no men have
ever enjoyed.  I had opened my mouth to utter some hot retort, when Lord
John got before me.

"You had a scrap once before with old man Challenger," said he sternly,
"and you were down and out inside ten seconds.  It seems to me, Professor
Summerlee, he's beyond your class, and the best you can do with him is to
walk wide and leave him alone."

"Besides," said I, "he has been a good friend to every one of us.
Whatever his faults may be, he is as straight as a line, and I don't
believe he ever speaks evil of his comrades behind their backs."

"Well said, young fellah-my-lad," said Lord John Roxton.  Then, with a
kindly smile, he slapped Professor Summerlee upon his shoulder.  "Come,
Herr Professor, we're not going to quarrel at this time of day.  We've
seen too much together.  But keep off the grass when you get near
Challenger, for this young fellah and I have a bit of a weakness for the
old dear."

But Summerlee was in no humour for compromise.  His face was screwed up
in rigid disapproval, and thick curls of angry smoke rolled up from his
pipe.

"As to you, Lord John Roxton," he creaked, "your opinion upon a matter of
science is of as much value in my eyes as my views upon a new type of
shot-gun would be in yours.  I have my own judgment, sir, and I use it in
my own way.  Because it has misled me once, is that any reason why I
should accept without criticism anything, however far-fetched, which this
man may care to put forward?  Are we to have a Pope of science, with
infallible decrees laid down _ex cathedra_, and accepted without question
by the poor humble public?  I tell you, sir, that I have a brain of my
own and that I should feel myself to be a snob and a slave if I did not
use it.  If it pleases you to believe this rigmarole about ether and
Fraunhofer's lines upon the spectrum, do so by all means, but do not ask
one who is older and wiser than yourself to share in your folly.  Is it
not evident that if the ether were affected to the degree which he
maintains, and if it were obnoxious to human health, the result of it
would already be apparent upon ourselves?" Here he laughed with
uproarious triumph over his own argument.  "Yes, sir, we should already
be very far from our normal selves, and instead of sitting quietly
discussing scientific problems in a railway train we should be showing
actual symptoms of the poison which was working within us.  Where do we
see any signs of this poisonous cosmic disturbance?  Answer me that, sir!
Answer me that!  Come, come, no evasion!  I pin you to an answer!"

I felt more and more angry.  There was something very irritating and
aggressive in Summerlee's demeanour.

"I think that if you knew more about the facts you might be less positive
in your opinion," said I.

Summerlee took his pipe from his mouth and fixed me with a stony stare.

"Pray what do you mean, sir, by that somewhat impertinent observation?"

"I mean that when I was leaving the office the news editor told me that a
telegram had come in confirming the general illness of the Sumatra
natives, and adding that the lights had not been lit in the Straits of
Sunda."

"Really, there should be some limits to human folly!" cried Summerlee in
a positive fury.  "Is it possible that you do not realize that ether, if
for a moment we adopt Challenger's preposterous supposition, is a
universal substance which is the same here as at the other side of the
world?  Do you for an instant suppose that there is an English ether and
a Sumatran ether?  Perhaps you imagine that the ether of Kent is in some
way superior to the ether of Surrey, through which this train is now
bearing us.  There really are no bounds to the credulity and ignorance of
the average layman.  Is it conceivable that the ether in Sumatra should
be so deadly as to cause total insensibility at the very time when the
ether here has had no appreciable effect upon us whatever?  Personally, I
can truly say that I never felt stronger in body or better balanced in
mind in my life."

"That may be.  I don't profess to be a scientific man," said I, "though I
have heard somewhere that the science of one generation is usually the
fallacy of the next.  But it does not take much common sense to see that,
as we seem to know so little about ether, it might be affected by some
local conditions in various parts of the world and might show an effect
over there which would only develop later with us."

"With 'might' and 'may' you can prove anything," cried Summerlee
furiously.  "Pigs may fly.  Yes, sir, pigs _may_ fly--but they don't.  It
is not worth arguing with you.  Challenger has filled you with his
nonsense and you are both incapable of reason.  I had as soon lay
arguments before those railway cushions."

"I must say, Professor Summerlee, that your manners do not seem to have
improved since I last had the pleasure of meeting you," said Lord John
severely.

"You lordlings are not accustomed to hear the truth," Summerlee answered
with a bitter smile.  "It comes as a bit of a shock, does it not, when
someone makes you realize that your title leaves you none the less a very
ignorant man?"

"Upon my word, sir," said Lord John, very stern and rigid, "if you were a
younger man you would not dare to speak to me in so offensive a fashion."

Summerlee thrust out his chin, with its little wagging tuft of goatee
beard.

"I would have you know, sir, that, young or old, there has never been a
time in my life when I was afraid to speak my mind to an ignorant
coxcomb--yes, sir, an ignorant coxcomb, if you had as many titles as
slaves could invent and fools could adopt."

For a moment Lord John's eyes blazed, and then, with a tremendous effort,
he mastered his anger and leaned back in his seat with arms folded and a
bitter smile upon his face.  To me all this was dreadful and deplorable.
Like a wave, the memory of the past swept over me, the good comradeship,
the happy, adventurous days--all that we had suffered and worked for and
won.  That it should have come to this--to insults and abuse!  Suddenly I
was sobbing--sobbing in loud, gulping, uncontrollable sobs which refused
to be concealed.  My companions looked at me in surprise.  I covered my
face with my hands.

"It's all right," said I.  "Only--only it _is_ such a pity!"

"You're ill, young fellah, that's what's amiss with you," said Lord John.
"I thought you were queer from the first."

"Your habits, sir, have not mended in these three years," said Summerlee,
shaking his head.  "I also did not fail to observe your strange manner
the moment we met.  You need not waste your sympathy, Lord John.  These
tears are purely alcoholic.  The man has been drinking.  By the way, Lord
John, I called you a coxcomb just now, which was perhaps unduly severe.
But the word reminds me of a small accomplishment, trivial but amusing,
which I used to possess.  You know me as the austere man of science.  Can
you believe that I once had a well-deserved reputation in several
nurseries as a farmyard imitator?  Perhaps I can help you to pass the
time in a pleasant way.  Would it amuse you to hear me crow like a cock?"

"No, sir," said Lord John, who was still greatly offended, "it would
_not_ amuse me."

"My imitation of the clucking hen who had just laid an egg was also
considered rather above the average.  Might I venture?"

"No, sir, no--certainly not."

But in spite of this earnest prohibition, Professor Summerlee laid down
his pipe and for the rest of our journey he entertained--or failed to
entertain--us by a succession of bird and animal cries which seemed so
absurd that my tears were suddenly changed into boisterous laughter,
which must have become quite hysterical as I sat opposite this grave
Professor and saw him--or rather heard him--in the character of the
uproarious rooster or the puppy whose tail had been trodden upon.  Once
Lord John passed across his newspaper, upon the margin of which he had
written in pencil, "Poor devil!  Mad as a hatter."  No doubt it was very
eccentric, and yet the performance struck me as extraordinarily clever
and amusing.

Whilst this was going on, Lord John leaned forward and told me some
interminable story about a buffalo and an Indian rajah which seemed to me
to have neither beginning nor end.  Professor Summerlee had just begun to
chirrup like a canary, and Lord John to get to the climax of his story,
when the train drew up at Jarvis Brook, which had been given us as the
station for Rotherfield.

And there was Challenger to meet us.  His appearance was glorious.  Not
all the turkey-cocks in creation could match the slow, high-stepping
dignity with which he paraded his own railway station and the benignant
smile of condescending encouragement with which he regarded everybody
around him.  If he had changed in anything since the days of old, it was
that his points had become accentuated.  The huge head and broad sweep of
forehead, with its plastered lock of black hair, seemed even greater than
before.  His black beard poured forward in a more impressive cascade, and
his clear grey eyes, with their insolent and sardonic eyelids, were even
more masterful than of yore.

He gave me the amused hand-shake and encouraging smile which the head
master bestows upon the small boy, and, having greeted the others and
helped to collect their bags and their cylinders of oxygen, he stowed us
and them away in a large motor-car which was driven by the same impassive
Austin, the man of few words, whom I had seen in the character of butler
upon the occasion of my first eventful visit to the Professor.  Our
journey led us up a winding hill through beautiful country.  I sat in
front with the chauffeur, but behind me my three comrades seemed to me to
be all talking together.  Lord John was still struggling with his buffalo
story, so far as I could make out, while once again I heard, as of old,
the deep rumble of Challenger and the insistent accents of Summerlee as
their brains locked in high and fierce scientific debate.  Suddenly
Austin slanted his mahogany face toward me without taking his eyes from
his steering-wheel.

"I'm under notice," said he.

"Dear me!" said I.

Everything seemed strange to-day.  Everyone said queer, unexpected
things.  It was like a dream.

"It's forty-seven times," said Austin reflectively.

"When do you go?" I asked, for want of some better observation.

"I don't go," said Austin.

The conversation seemed to have ended there, but presently he came back
to it.

"If I was to go, who would look after 'im?"  He jerked his head toward
his master.  "Who would 'e get to serve 'im?"

"Someone else," I suggested lamely.

"Not 'e.  No one would stay a week.  If I was to go, that 'ouse would run
down like a watch with the mainspring out.  I'm telling you because
you're 'is friend, and you ought to know.  If I was to take 'im at 'is
word--but there, I wouldn't have the 'eart.  'E and the missus would be
like two babes left out in a bundle.  I'm just everything.  And then 'e
goes and gives me notice."

"Why would no one stay?" I asked.

"Well, they wouldn't make allowances, same as I do.  'E's a very clever
man, the master--so clever that 'e's clean balmy sometimes.  I've seen
'im right off 'is onion, and no error.  Well, look what 'e did this
morning."

"What did he do?"

Austin bent over to me.

"'E bit the 'ousekeeper," said he in a hoarse whisper.

"Bit her?"

"Yes, sir.  Bit 'er on the leg.  I saw 'er with my own eyes startin' a
marathon from the 'all-door."

"Good gracious!"

"So you'd say, sir, if you could see some of the goings on.  'E don't
make friends with the neighbors.  There's some of them thinks that when
'e was up among those monsters you wrote about, it was just ''Ome, Sweet
'Ome' for the master, and 'e was never in fitter company.  That's what
_they_ say.  But I've served 'im ten years, and I'm fond of 'im, and,
mind you, 'e's a great man, when all's said an' done, and it's an honor
to serve 'im.  But 'e does try one cruel at times.  Now look at that,
sir.  That ain't what you might call old-fashioned 'ospitality, is it
now?  Just you read it for yourself."

The car on its lowest speed had ground its way up a steep, curving
ascent.  At the corner a notice-board peered over a well-clipped hedge.
As Austin said, it was not difficult to read, for the words were few and
arresting:--

                 +---------------------------------------+
                 |               WARNING.                |
                 |                ----                   |
                 |  Visitors, Pressmen, and Mendicants   |
                 |        are not encouraged.            |
                 |                                       |
                 |                  G. E. CHALLENGER.    |
                 +---------------------------------------+


"No, it's not what you might call 'earty," said Austin, shaking his head
and glancing up at the deplorable placard.  "It wouldn't look well in a
Christmas card.  I beg your pardon, sir, for I haven't spoke as much as
this for many a long year, but to-day my feelings seem to 'ave got the
better of me.  'E can sack me till 'e's blue in the face, but I ain't
going, and that's flat.  I'm 'is man and 'e's my master, and so it will
be, I expect, to the end of the chapter."

We had passed between the white posts of a gate and up a curving drive,
lined with rhododendron bushes.  Beyond stood a low brick house, picked
out with white woodwork, very comfortable and pretty.  Mrs. Challenger, a
small, dainty, smiling figure, stood in the open doorway to welcome us.

"Well, my dear," said Challenger, bustling out of the car, "here are our
visitors.  It is something new for us to have visitors, is it not?  No
love lost between us and our neighbors, is there?  If they could get rat
poison into our baker's cart, I expect it would be there."

"It's dreadful--dreadful!" cried the lady, between laughter and tears.
"George is always quarreling with everyone.  We haven't a friend on the
countryside."

"It enables me to concentrate my attention upon my incomparable wife,"
said Challenger, passing his short, thick arm round her waist.  Picture a
gorilla and a gazelle, and you have the pair of them.  "Come, come, these
gentlemen are tired from the journey, and luncheon should be ready.  Has
Sarah returned?"

The lady shook her head ruefully, and the Professor laughed loudly and
stroked his beard in his masterful fashion.

"Austin," he cried, "when you have put up the car you will kindly help
your mistress to lay the lunch.  Now, gentlemen, will you please step
into my study, for there are one or two very urgent things which I am
anxious to say to you."



Chapter II

THE TIDE OF DEATH


As we crossed the hall the telephone-bell rang, and we were the
involuntary auditors of Professor Challenger's end of the ensuing
dialogue.  I say "we," but no one within a hundred yards could have
failed to hear the booming of that monstrous voice, which reverberated
through the house.  His answers lingered in my mind.

"Yes, yes, of course, it is I....  Yes, certainly, _the_ Professor
Challenger, the famous Professor, who else?...  Of course, every word of
it, otherwise I should not have written it....  I shouldn't be
surprised....  There is every indication of it....  Within a day or so at
the furthest....  Well, I can't help that, can I?...  Very unpleasant, no
doubt, but I rather fancy it will affect more important people than you.
There is no use whining about it....  No, I couldn't possibly.  You must
take your chance....  That's enough, sir.  Nonsense!  I have something
more important to do than to listen to such twaddle."

He shut off with a crash and led us upstairs into a large airy apartment
which formed his study.  On the great mahogany desk seven or eight
unopened telegrams were lying.

"Really," he said as he gathered them up, "I begin to think that it would
save my correspondents' money if I were to adopt a telegraphic address.
Possibly 'Noah, Rotherfield,' would be the most appropriate."

As usual when he made an obscure joke, he leaned against the desk and
bellowed in a paroxysm of laughter, his hands shaking so that he could
hardly open the envelopes.

"Noah!  Noah!" he gasped, with a face of beetroot, while Lord John and I
smiled in sympathy and Summerlee, like a dyspeptic goat, wagged his head
in sardonic disagreement.  Finally Challenger, still rumbling and
exploding, began to open his telegrams.  The three of us stood in the bow
window and occupied ourselves in admiring the magnificent view.

It was certainly worth looking at.  The road in its gentle curves had
really brought us to a considerable elevation--seven hundred feet, as we
afterwards discovered.  Challenger's house was on the very edge of the
hill, and from its southern face, in which was the study window, one
looked across the vast stretch of the weald to where the gentle curves of
the South Downs formed an undulating horizon.  In a cleft of the hills a
haze of smoke marked the position of Lewes.  Immediately at our feet
there lay a rolling plain of heather, with the long, vivid green
stretches of the Crowborough golf course, all dotted with the players.  A
little to the south, through an opening in the woods, we could see a
section of the main line from London to Brighton.  In the immediate
foreground, under our very noses, was a small enclosed yard, in which
stood the car which had brought us from the station.

An ejaculation from Challenger caused us to turn.  He had read his
telegrams and had arranged them in a little methodical pile upon his
desk.  His broad, rugged face, or as much of it as was visible over the
matted beard, was still deeply flushed, and he seemed to be under the
influence of some strong excitement.

"Well, gentlemen," he said, in a voice as if he was addressing a public
meeting, "this is indeed an interesting reunion, and it takes place under
extraordinary--I may say unprecedented--circumstances.  May I ask if you
have observed anything upon your journey from town?"

"The only thing which I observed," said Summerlee with a sour smile, "was
that our young friend here has not improved in his manners during the
years that have passed.  I am sorry to state that I have had to seriously
complain of his conduct in the train, and I should be wanting in
frankness if I did not say that it has left a most unpleasant impression
in my mind."

"Well, well, we all get a bit prosy sometimes," said Lord John.  "The
young fellah meant no real harm.  After all, he's an International, so if
he takes half an hour to describe a game of football he has more right to
do it than most folk."

"Half an hour to describe a game!" I cried indignantly.  "Why, it was you
that took half an hour with some long-winded story about a buffalo.
Professor Summerlee will be my witness."

"I can hardly judge which of you was the most utterly wearisome," said
Summerlee.  "I declare to you, Challenger, that I never wish to hear of
football or of buffaloes so long as I live."

"I have never said one word to-day about football," I protested.

Lord John gave a shrill whistle, and Summerlee shook his head sadly.

"So early in the day too," said he.  "It is indeed deplorable.  As I sat
there in sad but thoughtful silence----"

"In silence!" cried Lord John.  "Why, you were doin' a music-hall turn of
imitations all the way--more like a runaway gramophone than a man."

Summerlee drew himself up in bitter protest.

"You are pleased to be facetious, Lord John," said he with a face of
vinegar.

"Why, dash it all, this is clear madness," cried Lord John.  "Each of us
seems to know what the others did and none of us knows what he did
himself.  Let's put it all together from the first.  We got into a
first-class smoker, that's clear, ain't it?  Then we began to quarrel
over friend Challenger's letter in the Times."

"Oh, you did, did you?" rumbled our host, his eyelids beginning to droop.

"You said, Summerlee, that there was no possible truth in his contention."

"Dear me!" said Challenger, puffing out his chest and stroking his beard.
"No possible truth!  I seem to have heard the words before.  And may I
ask with what arguments the great and famous Professor Summerlee
proceeded to demolish the humble individual who had ventured to express
an opinion upon a matter of scientific possibility?  Perhaps before he
exterminates that unfortunate nonentity he will condescend to give some
reasons for the adverse views which he has formed."

He bowed and shrugged and spread open his hands as he spoke with his
elaborate and elephantine sarcasm.

"The reason was simple enough," said the dogged Summerlee.  "I contended
that if the ether surrounding the earth was so toxic in one quarter that
it produced dangerous symptoms, it was hardly likely that we three in the
railway carriage should be entirely unaffected."

The explanation only brought uproarious merriment from Challenger.  He
laughed until everything in the room seemed to rattle and quiver.

"Our worthy Summerlee is, not for the first time, somewhat out of touch
with the facts of the situation," said he at last, mopping his heated
brow.  "Now, gentlemen, I cannot make my point better than by detailing
to you what I have myself done this morning.  You will the more easily
condone any mental aberration upon your own part when you realize that
even I have had moments when my balance has been disturbed.  We have had
for some years in this household a housekeeper--one Sarah, with whose
second name I have never attempted to burden my memory.  She is a woman
of a severe and forbidding aspect, prim and demure in her bearing, very
impassive in her nature, and never known within our experience to show
signs of any emotion.  As I sat alone at my breakfast--Mrs. Challenger is
in the habit of keeping her room of a morning--it suddenly entered my
head that it would be entertaining and instructive to see whether I could
find any limits to this woman's inperturbability.  I devised a simple but
effective experiment.  Having upset a small vase of flowers which stood
in the centre of the cloth, I rang the bell and slipped under the table.
She entered and, seeing the room empty, imagined that I had withdrawn to
the study.  As I had expected, she approached and leaned over the table
to replace the vase.  I had a vision of a cotton stocking and an
elastic-sided boot.  Protruding my head, I sank my teeth into the calf of
her leg.  The experiment was successful beyond belief.  For some moments
she stood paralyzed, staring down at my head.  Then with a shriek she
tore herself free and rushed from the room.  I pursued her with some
thoughts of an explanation, but she flew down the drive, and some minutes
afterwards I was able to pick her out with my field-glasses travelling
very rapidly in a south-westerly direction.  I tell you the anecdote for
what it is worth.  I drop it into your brains and await its germination.
Is it illuminative?  Has it conveyed anything to your minds?  What do
_you_ think of it, Lord John?"

Lord John shook his head gravely.

"You'll be gettin' into serious trouble some of these days if you don't
put a brake on," said he.

"Perhaps you have some observation to make, Summerlee?"

"You should drop all work instantly, Challenger, and take three months in
a German watering-place," said he.

"Profound!  Profound!" cried Challenger.  "Now, my young friend, is it
possible that wisdom may come from you where your seniors have so
signally failed?"

And it did.  I say it with all modesty, but it did.  Of course, it all
seems obvious enough to you who know what occurred, but it was not so
very clear when everything was new.  But it came on me suddenly with the
full force of absolute conviction.

"Poison!" I cried.

Then, even as I said the word, my mind flashed back over the whole
morning's experiences, past Lord John with his buffalo, past my own
hysterical tears, past the outrageous conduct of Professor Summerlee, to
the queer happenings in London, the row in the park, the driving of the
chauffeur, the quarrel at the oxygen warehouse.  Everything fitted
suddenly into its place.

"Of course," I cried again.  "It is poison.  We are all poisoned."

"Exactly," said Challenger, rubbing his hands, "we are all poisoned.  Our
planet has swum into the poison belt of ether, and is now flying deeper
into it at the rate of some millions of miles a minute.  Our young friend
has expressed the cause of all our troubles and perplexities in a single
word, 'poison.'"

We looked at each other in amazed silence.  No comment seemed to meet the
situation.

"There is a mental inhibition by which such symptoms can be checked and
controlled," said Challenger.  "I cannot expect to find it developed in
all of you to the same point which it has reached in me, for I suppose
that the strength of our different mental processes bears some proportion
to each other.  But no doubt it is appreciable even in our young friend
here.  After the little outburst of high spirits which so alarmed my
domestic I sat down and reasoned with myself.  I put it to myself that I
had never before felt impelled to bite any of my household.  The impulse
had then been an abnormal one.  In an instant I perceived the truth.  My
pulse upon examination was ten beats above the usual, and my reflexes
were increased.  I called upon my higher and saner self, the real G. E.
C., seated serene and impregnable behind all mere molecular disturbance.
I summoned him, I say, to watch the foolish mental tricks which the
poison would play.  I found that I was indeed the master.  I could
recognize and control a disordered mind.  It was a remarkable exhibition
of the victory of mind over matter, for it was a victory over that
particular form of matter which is most intimately connected with mind.
I might almost say that mind was at fault and that personality controlled
it.  Thus, when my wife came downstairs and I was impelled to slip behind
the door and alarm her by some wild cry as she entered, I was able to
stifle the impulse and to greet her with dignity and restraint.  An
overpowering desire to quack like a duck was met and mastered in the same
fashion.

"Later, when I descended to order the car and found Austin bending over
it absorbed in repairs, I controlled my open hand even after I had lifted
it and refrained from giving him an experience which would possibly have
caused him to follow in the steps of the housekeeper.  On the contrary, I
touched him on the shoulder and ordered the car to be at the door in time
to meet your train.  At the present instant I am most forcibly tempted to
take Professor Summerlee by that silly old beard of his and to shake his
head violently backwards and forwards.  And yet, as you see, I am
perfectly restrained.  Let me commend my example to you."

"I'll look out for that buffalo," said Lord John.

"And I for the football match."

"It may be that you are right, Challenger," said Summerlee in a chastened
voice.  "I am willing to admit that my turn of mind is critical rather
than constructive and that I am not a ready convert to any new theory,
especially when it happens to be so unusual and fantastic as this one.
However, as I cast my mind back over the events of the morning, and as I
reconsider the fatuous conduct of my companions, I find it easy to
believe that some poison of an exciting kind was responsible for their
symptoms."

Challenger slapped his colleague good-humouredly upon the shoulder.  "We
progress," said he.  "Decidedly we progress."

"And pray, sir," asked Summerlee humbly, "what is your opinion as to the
present outlook?"

"With your permission I will say a few words upon that subject." He
seated himself upon his desk, his short, stumpy legs swinging in front of
him.  "We are assisting at a tremendous and awful function.  It is, in my
opinion, the end of the world."

The end of the world!  Our eyes turned to the great bow-window and we
looked out at the summer beauty of the country-side, the long slopes of
heather, the great country-houses, the cozy farms, the pleasure-seekers
upon the links.

The end of the world!  One had often heard the words, but the idea that
they could ever have an immediate practical significance, that it should
not be at some vague date, but now, to-day, that was a tremendous, a
staggering thought.  We were all struck solemn and waited in silence for
Challenger to continue.  His overpowering presence and appearance lent
such force to the solemnity of his words that for a moment all the
crudities and absurdities of the man vanished, and he loomed before us as
something majestic and beyond the range of ordinary humanity.  Then to
me, at least, there came back the cheering recollection of how twice
since we had entered the room he had roared with laughter.  Surely, I
thought, there are limits to mental detachment.  The crisis cannot be so
great or so pressing after all.

"You will conceive a bunch of grapes," said he, "which are covered by
some infinitesimal but noxious bacillus.  The gardener passes it through
a disinfecting medium.  It may be that he desires his grapes to be
cleaner.  It may be that he needs space to breed some fresh bacillus less
noxious than the last.  He dips it into the poison and they are gone.
Our Gardener is, in my opinion, about to dip the solar system, and the
human bacillus, the little mortal vibrio which twisted and wriggled upon
the outer rind of the earth, will in an instant be sterilized out of
existence."

Again there was silence.  It was broken by the high trill of the
telephone-bell.

"There is one of our bacilli squeaking for help," said he with a grim
smile.  "They are beginning to realize that their continued existence is
not really one of the necessities of the universe."

He was gone from the room for a minute or two.  I remember that none of
us spoke in his absence.  The situation seemed beyond all words or
comments.

"The medical officer of health for Brighton," said he when he returned.
"The symptoms are for some reason developing more rapidly upon the sea
level.  Our seven hundred feet of elevation give us an advantage.  Folk
seem to have learned that I am the first authority upon the question.  No
doubt it comes from my letter in the Times.  That was the mayor of a
provincial town with whom I talked when we first arrived.  You may have
heard me upon the telephone.  He seemed to put an entirely inflated value
upon his own life.  I helped him to readjust his ideas."

Summerlee had risen and was standing by the window.  His thin, bony hands
were trembling with his emotion.

"Challenger," said he earnestly, "this thing is too serious for mere
futile argument.  Do not suppose that I desire to irritate you by any
question I may ask.  But I put it to you whether there may not be some
fallacy in your information or in your reasoning.  There is the sun
shining as brightly as ever in the blue sky.  There are the heather and
the flowers and the birds.  There are the folk enjoying themselves upon
the golf-links and the laborers yonder cutting the corn.  You tell us
that they and we may be upon the very brink of destruction--that this
sunlit day may be that day of doom which the human race has so long
awaited.  So far as we know, you found this tremendous judgment upon
what?  Upon some abnormal lines in a spectrum--upon rumours from
Sumatra--upon some curious personal excitement which we have discerned in
each other.  This latter symptom is not so marked but that you and we
could, by a deliberate effort, control it.  You need not stand on
ceremony with us, Challenger.  We have all faced death together before
now.  Speak out, and let us know exactly where we stand, and what, in
your opinion, are our prospects for our future."

It was a brave, good speech, a speech from that stanch and strong spirit
which lay behind all the acidities and angularities of the old zoologist.
Lord John rose and shook him by the hand.

"My sentiment to a tick," said he.  "Now, Challenger, it's up to you to
tell us where we are.  We ain't nervous folk, as you know well; but when
it comes to makin' a week-end visit and finding you've run full butt into
the Day of Judgment, it wants a bit of explainin'.  What's the danger,
and how much of it is there, and what are we goin' to do to meet it?"

He stood, tall and strong, in the sunshine at the window, with his brown
hand upon the shoulder of Summerlee.  I was lying back in an armchair, an
extinguished cigarette between my lips, in that sort of half-dazed state
in which impressions become exceedingly distinct.  It may have been a new
phase of the poisoning, but the delirious promptings had all passed away
and were succeeded by an exceedingly languid and, at the same time,
perceptive state of mind.  I was a spectator.  It did not seem to be any
personal concern of mine.  But here were three strong men at a great
crisis, and it was fascinating to observe them.  Challenger bent his
heavy brows and stroked his beard before he answered.  One could see that
he was very carefully weighing his words.

"What was the last news when you left London?" he asked.

"I was at the Gazette office about ten," said I.  "There was a Reuter
just come in from Singapore to the effect that the sickness seemed to be
universal in Sumatra and that the lighthouses had not been lit in
consequence."

"Events have been moving somewhat rapidly since then," said Challenger,
picking up his pile of telegrams.  "I am in close touch both with the
authorities and with the press, so that news is converging upon me from
all parts.  There is, in fact, a general and very insistent demand that I
should come to London; but I see no good end to be served.  From the
accounts the poisonous effect begins with mental excitement; the rioting
in Paris this morning is said to have been very violent, and the Welsh
colliers are in a state of uproar.  So far as the evidence to hand can be
trusted, this stimulative stage, which varies much in races and in
individuals, is succeeded by a certain exaltation and mental lucidity--I
seem to discern some signs of it in our young friend here--which, after
an appreciable interval, turns to coma, deepening rapidly into death.  I
fancy, so far as my toxicology carries me, that there are some vegetable
nerve poisons----"

"Datura," suggested Summerlee.

"Excellent!" cried Challenger.  "It would make for scientific precision
if we named our toxic agent.  Let it be daturon.  To you, my dear
Summerlee, belongs the honour--posthumous, alas, but none the less
unique--of having given a name to the universal destroyer, the Great
Gardener's disinfectant.  The symptoms of daturon, then, may be taken to
be such as I indicate.  That it will involve the whole world and that no
life can possibly remain behind seems to me to be certain, since ether is
a universal medium.  Up to now it has been capricious in the places which
it has attacked, but the difference is only a matter of a few hours, and
it is like an advancing tide which covers one strip of sand and then
another, running hither and thither in irregular streams, until at last
it has submerged it all.  There are laws at work in connection with the
action and distribution of daturon which would have been of deep interest
had the time at our disposal permitted us to study them.  So far as I can
trace them"--here he glanced over his telegrams--"the less developed
races have been the first to respond to its influence.  There are
deplorable accounts from Africa, and the Australian aborigines appear to
have been already exterminated.  The Northern races have as yet shown
greater resisting power than the Southern.  This, you see, is dated from
Marseilles at nine-forty-five this morning.  I give it to you verbatim:--

"'All night delirious excitement throughout Provence.  Tumult of vine
growers at Nimes.  Socialistic upheaval at Toulon.  Sudden illness
attended by coma attacked population this morning.  _Peste foudroyante_.
Great numbers of dead in the streets.  Paralysis of business and
universal chaos.'

"An hour later came the following, from the same source:--

"'We are threatened with utter extermination.  Cathedrals and churches
full to overflowing.  The dead outnumber the living.  It is inconceivable
and horrible.  Decease seems to be painless, but swift and inevitable.'

"There is a similar telegram from Paris, where the development is not yet
as acute.  India and Persia appear to be utterly wiped out.  The Slavonic
population of Austria is down, while the Teutonic has hardly been
affected.  Speaking generally, the dwellers upon the plains and upon the
seashore seem, so far as my limited information goes, to have felt the
effects more rapidly than those inland or on the heights.  Even a little
elevation makes a considerable difference, and perhaps if there be a
survivor of the human race, he will again be found upon the summit of
some Ararat.  Even our own little hill may presently prove to be a
temporary island amid a sea of disaster.  But at the present rate of
advance a few short hours will submerge us all."

Lord John Roxton wiped his brow.

"What beats me," said he, "is how you could sit there laughin' with that
stack of telegrams under your hand.  I've seen death as often as most
folk, but universal death--it's awful!"

"As to the laughter," said Challenger, "you will bear in mind that, like
yourselves, I have not been exempt from the stimulating cerebral effects
of the etheric poison.  But as to the horror with which universal death
appears to inspire you, I would put it to you that it is somewhat
exaggerated.  If you were sent to sea alone in an open boat to some
unknown destination, your heart might well sink within you.  The
isolation, the uncertainty, would oppress you.  But if your voyage were
made in a goodly ship, which bore within it all your relations and your
friends, you would feel that, however uncertain your destination might
still remain, you would at least have one common and simultaneous
experience which would hold you to the end in the same close communion.
A lonely death may be terrible, but a universal one, as painless as this
would appear to be, is not, in my judgment, a matter for apprehension.
Indeed, I could sympathize with the person who took the view that the
horror lay in the idea of surviving when all that is learned, famous, and
exalted had passed away."

"What, then, do you propose to do?" asked Summerlee, who had for once
nodded his assent to the reasoning of his brother scientist.

"To take our lunch," said Challenger as the boom of a gong sounded
through the house.  "We have a cook whose omelettes are only excelled by
her cutlets.  We can but trust that no cosmic disturbance has dulled her
excellent abilities.  My Scharzberger of '96 must also be rescued, so far
as our earnest and united efforts can do it, from what would be a
deplorable waste of a great vintage."  He levered his great bulk off the
desk, upon which he had sat while he announced the doom of the planet.
"Come," said he.  "If there is little time left, there is the more need
that we should spend it in sober and reasonable enjoyment."

And, indeed, it proved to be a very merry meal.  It is true that we could
not forget our awful situation.  The full solemnity of the event loomed
ever at the back of our minds and tempered our thoughts.  But surely it
is the soul which has never faced death which shies strongly from it at
the end.  To each of us men it had, for one great epoch in our lives,
been a familiar presence.  As to the lady, she leaned upon the strong
guidance of her mighty husband and was well content to go whither his
path might lead.  The future was our fate.  The present was our own.  We
passed it in goodly comradeship and gentle merriment.  Our minds were, as
I have said, singularly lucid.  Even I struck sparks at times.  As to
Challenger, he was wonderful!  Never have I so realized the elemental
greatness of the man, the sweep and power of his understanding.
Summerlee drew him on with his chorus of subacid criticism, while Lord
John and I laughed at the contest and the lady, her hand upon his sleeve,
controlled the bellowings of the philosopher.  Life, death, fate, the
destiny of man--these were the stupendous subjects of that memorable
hour, made vital by the fact that as the meal progressed strange, sudden
exaltations in my mind and tinglings in my limbs proclaimed that the
invisible tide of death was slowly and gently rising around us.  Once I
saw Lord John put his hand suddenly to his eyes, and once Summerlee
dropped back for an instant in his chair.  Each breath we breathed was
charged with strange forces.  And yet our minds were happy and at ease.
Presently Austin laid the cigarettes upon the table and was about to
withdraw.

"Austin!" said his master.

"Yes, sir?"

"I thank you for your faithful service."  A smile stole over the
servant's gnarled face.

"I've done my duty, sir."

"I'm expecting the end of the world to-day, Austin."

"Yes, sir.  What time, sir?"

"I can't say, Austin.  Before evening."

"Very good, sir."

The taciturn Austin saluted and withdrew.  Challenger lit a cigarette,
and, drawing his chair closer to his wife's, he took her hand in his.

"You know how matters stand, dear," said he.  "I have explained it also
to our friends here.  You're not afraid are you?"

"It won't be painful, George?"

"No more than laughing-gas at the dentist's.  Every time you have had it
you have practically died."

"But that is a pleasant sensation."

"So may death be.  The worn-out bodily machine can't record its
impression, but we know the mental pleasure which lies in a dream or a
trance.  Nature may build a beautiful door and hang it with many a gauzy
and shimmering curtain to make an entrance to the new life for our
wondering souls.  In all my probings of the actual, I have always found
wisdom and kindness at the core; and if ever the frightened mortal needs
tenderness, it is surely as he makes the passage perilous from life to
life.  No, Summerlee, I will have none of your materialism, for I, at
least, am too great a thing to end in mere physical constituents, a
packet of salts and three bucketfuls of water.  Here--here"--and he beat
his great head with his huge, hairy fist--"there is something which uses
matter, but is not of it--something which might destroy death, but which
death can never destroy."

"Talkin' of death," said Lord John.  "I'm a Christian of sorts, but it
seems to me there was somethin' mighty natural in those ancestors of ours
who were buried with their axes and bows and arrows and the like, same as
if they were livin' on just the same as they used to.  I don't know," he
added, looking round the table in a shamefaced way, "that I wouldn't feel
more homely myself if I was put away with my old .450 Express and the
fowlin'-piece, the shorter one with the rubbered stock, and a clip or two
of cartridges--just a fool's fancy, of course, but there it is.  How does
it strike you, Herr Professor?"

"Well," said Summerlee, "since you ask my opinion, it strikes me as an
indefensible throwback to the Stone Age or before it.  I'm of the
twentieth century myself, and would wish to die like a reasonable
civilized man.  I don't know that I am more afraid of death than the rest
of you, for I am an oldish man, and, come what may, I can't have very
much longer to live; but it is all against my nature to sit waiting
without a struggle like a sheep for the butcher.  Is it quite certain,
Challenger, that there is nothing we can do?"

"To save us--nothing," said Challenger.  "To prolong our lives a few
hours and thus to see the evolution of this mighty tragedy before we are
actually involved in it--that may prove to be within my powers.  I have
taken certain steps----"

"The oxygen?"

"Exactly.  The oxygen."

"But what can oxygen effect in the face of a poisoning of the ether?
There is not a greater difference in quality between a brick-bat and a
gas than there is between oxygen and ether.  They are different planes of
matter.  They cannot impinge upon one another.  Come, Challenger, you
could not defend such a proposition."

"My good Summerlee, this etheric poison is most certainly influenced by
material agents.  We see it in the methods and distribution of the
outbreak.  We should not _a priori_ have expected it, but it is
undoubtedly a fact.  Hence I am strongly of opinion that a gas like
oxygen, which increases the vitality and the resisting power of the body,
would be extremely likely to delay the action of what you have so happily
named the daturon.  It may be that I am mistaken, but I have every
confidence in the correctness of my reasoning."

"Well," said Lord John, "if we've got to sit suckin' at those tubes like
so many babies with their bottles, I'm not takin' any."

"There will be no need for that," Challenger answered.  "We have made
arrangements--it is to my wife that you chiefly owe it--that her boudoir
shall be made as airtight as is practicable.  With matting and varnished
paper."

"Good heavens, Challenger, you don't suppose you can keep out ether with
varnished paper?"

"Really, my worthy friend, you are a trifle perverse in missing the
point.  It is not to keep out the ether that we have gone to such
trouble.  It is to keep in the oxygen.  I trust that if we can ensure an
atmosphere hyper-oxygenated to a certain point, we may be able to retain
our senses.  I had two tubes of the gas and you have brought me three
more.  It is not much, but it is something."

"How long will they last?"

"I have not an idea.  We will not turn them on until our symptoms become
unbearable.  Then we shall dole the gas out as it is urgently needed.  It
may give us some hours, possibly even some days, on which we may look out
upon a blasted world.  Our own fate is delayed to that extent, and we
will have the very singular experience, we five, of being, in all
probability, the absolute rear guard of the human race upon its march
into the unknown.  Perhaps you will be kind enough now to give me a hand
with the cylinders.  It seems to me that the atmosphere already grows
somewhat more oppressive."



Chapter III

SUBMERGED


The chamber which was destined to be the scene of our unforgettable
experience was a charmingly feminine sitting-room, some fourteen or
sixteen feet square.  At the end of it, divided by a curtain of red
velvet, was a small apartment which formed the Professor's dressing-room.
This in turn opened into a large bedroom.  The curtain was still hanging,
but the boudoir and dressing-room could be taken as one chamber for the
purposes of our experiment.  One door and the window frame had been
plastered round with varnished paper so as to be practically sealed.
Above the other door, which opened on to the landing, there hung a
fanlight which could be drawn by a cord when some ventilation became
absolutely necessary.  A large shrub in a tub stood in each corner.

"How to get rid of our excessive carbon dioxide without unduly wasting
our oxygen is a delicate and vital question," said Challenger, looking
round him after the five iron tubes had been laid side by side against
the wall.  "With longer time for preparation I could have brought the
whole concentrated force of my intelligence to bear more fully upon the
problem, but as it is we must do what we can.  The shrubs will be of some
small service.  Two of the oxygen tubes are ready to be turned on at an
instant's notice, so that we cannot be taken unawares.  At the same time,
it would be well not to go far from the room, as the crisis may be a
sudden and urgent one."

There was a broad, low window opening out upon a balcony.  The view
beyond was the same as that which we had already admired from the study.
Looking out, I could see no sign of disorder anywhere.  There was a road
curving down the side of the hill, under my very eyes.  A cab from the
station, one of those prehistoric survivals which are only to be found in
our country villages, was toiling slowly up the hill.  Lower down was a
nurse girl wheeling a perambulator and leading a second child by the
hand.  The blue reeks of smoke from the cottages gave the whole
widespread landscape an air of settled order and homely comfort.  Nowhere
in the blue heaven or on the sunlit earth was there any foreshadowing of
a catastrophe.  The harvesters were back in the fields once more and the
golfers, in pairs and fours, were still streaming round the links.  There
was so strange a turmoil within my own head, and such a jangling of my
overstrung nerves, that the indifference of those people was amazing.

"Those fellows don't seem to feel any ill effects," said I, pointing down
at the links.

"Have you played golf?" asked Lord John.

"No, I have not."

"Well, young fellah, when you do you'll learn that once fairly out on a
round, it would take the crack of doom to stop a true golfer.  Halloa!
There's that telephone-bell again."

From time to time during and after lunch the high, insistent ring had
summoned the Professor.  He gave us the news as it came through to him in
a few curt sentences.  Such terrific items had never been registered in
the world's history before.  The great shadow was creeping up from the
south like a rising tide of death.  Egypt had gone through its delirium
and was now comatose.  Spain and Portugal, after a wild frenzy in which
the Clericals and the Anarchists had fought most desperately, were now
fallen silent.  No cable messages were received any longer from South
America.  In North America the southern states, after some terrible
racial rioting, had succumbed to the poison.  North of Maryland the
effect was not yet marked, and in Canada it was hardly perceptible.
Belgium, Holland, and Denmark had each in turn been affected.  Despairing
messages were flashing from every quarter to the great centres of
learning, to the chemists and the doctors of world-wide repute, imploring
their advice.  The astronomers too were deluged with inquiries.  Nothing
could be done.  The thing was universal and beyond our human knowledge or
control.  It was death--painless but inevitable--death for young and old,
for weak and strong, for rich and poor, without hope or possibility of
escape.  Such was the news which, in scattered, distracted messages, the
telephone had brought us.  The great cities already knew their fate and
so far as we could gather were preparing to meet it with dignity and
resignation.  Yet here were our golfers and laborers like the lambs who
gambol under the shadow of the knife.  It seemed amazing.  And yet how
could they know?  It had all come upon us in one giant stride.  What was
there in the morning paper to alarm them?  And now it was but three in
the afternoon.  Even as we looked some rumour seemed to have spread, for
we saw the reapers hurrying from the fields.  Some of the golfers were
returning to the club-house.  They were running as if taking refuge from
a shower.  Their little caddies trailed behind them.  Others were
continuing their game.  The nurse had turned and was pushing her
perambulator hurriedly up the hill again.  I noticed that she had her
hand to her brow.  The cab had stopped and the tired horse, with his head
sunk to his knees, was resting.  Above there was a perfect summer
sky--one huge vault of unbroken blue, save for a few fleecy white clouds
over the distant downs.  If the human race must die to-day, it was at
least upon a glorious death-bed.  And yet all that gentle loveliness of
nature made this terrific and wholesale destruction the more pitiable and
awful.  Surely it was too goodly a residence that we should be so
swiftly, so ruthlessly, evicted from it!

But I have said that the telephone-bell had rung once more.  Suddenly I
heard Challenger's tremendous voice from the hall.

"Malone!" he cried.  "You are wanted."

I rushed down to the instrument.  It was McArdle speaking from London.

"That you, Mr. Malone?" cried his familiar voice.  "Mr. Malone, there are
terrible goings-on in London.  For God's sake, see if Professor
Challenger can suggest anything that can be done."

"He can suggest nothing, sir," I answered.  "He regards the crisis as
universal and inevitable.  We have some oxygen here, but it can only
defer our fate for a few hours."

"Oxygen!" cried the agonized voice.  "There is no time to get any.  The
office has been a perfect pandemonium ever since you left in the morning.
Now half of the staff are insensible.  I am weighed down with heaviness
myself.  From my window I can see the people lying thick in Fleet Street.
The traffic is all held up.  Judging by the last telegrams, the whole
world----"

His voice had been sinking, and suddenly stopped.  An instant later I
heard through the telephone a muffled thud, as if his head had fallen
forward on the desk.

"Mr. McArdle!" I cried.  "Mr. McArdle!"

There was no answer.  I knew as I replaced the receiver that I should
never hear his voice again.

At that instant, just as I took a step backwards from the telephone, the
thing was on us.  It was as if we were bathers, up to our shoulders in
water, who suddenly are submerged by a rolling wave.  An invisible hand
seemed to have quietly closed round my throat and to be gently pressing
the life from me.  I was conscious of immense oppression upon my chest,
great tightness within my head, a loud singing in my ears, and bright
flashes before my eyes.  I staggered to the balustrades of the stair.  At
the same moment, rushing and snorting like a wounded buffalo, Challenger
dashed past me, a terrible vision, with red-purple face, engorged eyes,
and bristling hair.  His little wife, insensible to all appearance, was
slung over his great shoulder, and he blundered and thundered up the
stair, scrambling and tripping, but carrying himself and her through
sheer will-force through that mephitic atmosphere to the haven of
temporary safety.  At the sight of his effort I too rushed up the steps,
clambering, falling, clutching at the rail, until I tumbled half
senseless upon by face on the upper landing.  Lord John's fingers of
steel were in the collar of my coat, and a moment later I was stretched
upon my back, unable to speak or move, on the boudoir carpet.  The woman
lay beside me, and Summerlee was bunched in a chair by the window, his
head nearly touching his knees.  As in a dream I saw Challenger, like a
monstrous beetle, crawling slowly across the floor, and a moment later I
heard the gentle hissing of the escaping oxygen.  Challenger breathed two
or three times with enormous gulps, his lungs roaring as he drew in the
vital gas.

"It works!" he cried exultantly.  "My reasoning has been justified!" He
was up on his feet again, alert and strong.  With a tube in his hand he
rushed over to his wife and held it to her face.  In a few seconds she
moaned, stirred, and sat up.  He turned to me, and I felt the tide of
life stealing warmly through my arteries.  My reason told me that it was
but a little respite, and yet, carelessly as we talk of its value, every
hour of existence now seemed an inestimable thing.  Never have I known
such a thrill of sensuous joy as came with that freshet of life.  The
weight fell away from my lungs, the band loosened from my brow, a sweet
feeling of peace and gentle, languid comfort stole over me.  I lay
watching Summerlee revive under the same remedy, and finally Lord John
took his turn.  He sprang to his feet and gave me a hand to rise, while
Challenger picked up his wife and laid her on the settee.

"Oh, George, I am so sorry you brought me back," she said, holding him by
the hand.  "The door of death is indeed, as you said, hung with
beautiful, shimmering curtains; for, once the choking feeling had passed,
it was all unspeakably soothing and beautiful.  Why have you dragged me
back?"

"Because I wish that we make the passage together.  We have been together
so many years.  It would be sad to fall apart at the supreme moment."

For a moment in his tender voice I caught a glimpse of a new Challenger,
something very far from the bullying, ranting, arrogant man who had
alternately amazed and offended his generation.  Here in the shadow of
death was the innermost Challenger, the man who had won and held a
woman's love.  Suddenly his mood changed and he was our strong captain
once again.

"Alone of all mankind I saw and foretold this catastrophe," said he with
a ring of exultation and scientific triumph in his voice.  "As to you, my
good Summerlee, I trust your last doubts have been resolved as to the
meaning of the blurring of the lines in the spectrum and that you will no
longer contend that my letter in the Times was based upon a delusion."

For once our pugnacious colleague was deaf to a challenge.  He could but
sit gasping and stretching his long, thin limbs, as if to assure himself
that he was still really upon this planet.  Challenger walked across to
the oxygen tube, and the sound of the loud hissing fell away till it was
the most gentle sibilation.

"We must husband our supply of the gas," said he.  "The atmosphere of the
room is now strongly hyperoxygenated, and I take it that none of us feel
any distressing symptoms.  We can only determine by actual experiments
what amount added to the air will serve to neutralize the poison.  Let us
see how that will do."

We sat in silent nervous tension for five minutes or more, observing our
own sensations.  I had just begun to fancy that I felt the constriction
round my temples again when Mrs. Challenger called out from the sofa that
she was fainting.  Her husband turned on more gas.

"In pre-scientific days," said he, "they used to keep a white mouse in
every submarine, as its more delicate organization gave signs of a
vicious atmosphere before it was perceived by the sailors.  You, my dear,
will be our white mouse.  I have now increased the supply and you are
better."

"Yes, I am better."

"Possibly we have hit upon the correct mixture.  When we have ascertained
exactly how little will serve we shall be able to compute how long we
shall be able to exist.  Unfortunately, in resuscitating ourselves we
have already consumed a considerable proportion of this first tube."

"Does it matter?" asked Lord John, who was standing with his hands in his
pockets close to the window.  "If we have to go, what is the use of
holdin' on?  You don't suppose there's any chance for us?"

Challenger smiled and shook his head.

"Well, then, don't you think there is more dignity in takin' the jump and
not waitin' to be pushed in?  If it must be so, I'm for sayin' our
prayers, turnin' off the gas, and openin' the window."

"Why not?" said the lady bravely.  "Surely, George, Lord John is right
and it is better so."

"I most strongly object," cried Summerlee in a querulous voice.  "When we
must die let us by all means die, but to deliberately anticipate death
seems to me to be a foolish and unjustifiable action."

"What does our young friend say to it?" asked Challenger.

"I think we should see it to the end."

"And I am strongly of the same opinion," said he.

"Then, George, if you say so, I think so too," cried the lady.

"Well, well, I'm only puttin' it as an argument," said Lord John.  "If
you all want to see it through I am with you.  It's dooced interestin',
and no mistake about that.  I've had my share of adventures in my life,
and as many thrills as most folk, but I'm endin' on my top note."

"Granting the continuity of life," said Challenger.

"A large assumption!" cried Summerlee.  Challenger stared at him in
silent reproof.

"Granting the continuity of life," said he, in his most didactic manner,
"none of us can predicate what opportunities of observation one may have
from what we may call the spirit plane to the plane of matter.  It surely
must be evident to the most obtuse person" (here he glared a Summerlee)
"that it is while we are ourselves material that we are most fitted to
watch and form a judgment upon material phenomena.  Therefore it is only
by keeping alive for these few extra hours that we can hope to carry on
with us to some future existence a clear conception of the most
stupendous event that the world, or the universe so far as we know it,
has ever encountered.  To me it would seem a deplorable thing that we
should in any way curtail by so much as a minute so wonderful an
experience."

"I am strongly of the same opinion," cried Summerlee.

"Carried without a division," said Lord John.  "By George, that poor
devil of a chauffeur of yours down in the yard has made his last journey.
No use makin' a sally and bringin' him in?"

"It would be absolute madness," cried Summerlee.

"Well, I suppose it would," said Lord John.  "It couldn't help him and
would scatter our gas all over the house, even if we ever got back alive.
My word, look at the little birds under the trees!"

We drew four chairs up to the long, low window, the lady still resting
with closed eyes upon the settee.  I remember that the monstrous and
grotesque idea crossed my mind--the illusion may have been heightened by
the heavy stuffiness of the air which we were breathing--that we were in
four front seats of the stalls at the last act of the drama of the world.

In the immediate foreground, beneath our very eyes, was the small yard
with the half-cleaned motor-car standing in it.  Austin, the chauffeur,
had received his final notice at last, for he was sprawling beside the
wheel, with a great black bruise upon his forehead where it had struck
the step or mud-guard in falling.  He still held in his hand the nozzle
of the hose with which he had been washing down his machine.  A couple of
small plane trees stood in the corner of the yard, and underneath them
lay several pathetic little balls of fluffy feathers, with tiny feet
uplifted.  The sweep of death's scythe had included everything, great and
small, within its swath.

Over the wall of the yard we looked down upon the winding road, which led
to the station.  A group of the reapers whom we had seen running from the
fields were lying all pell-mell, their bodies crossing each other, at the
bottom of it.  Farther up, the nurse-girl lay with her head and shoulders
propped against the slope of the grassy bank.  She had taken the baby
from the perambulator, and it was a motionless bundle of wraps in her
arms.  Close behind her a tiny patch upon the roadside showed where the
little boy was stretched.  Still nearer to us was the dead cab-horse,
kneeling between the shafts.  The old driver was hanging over the
splash-board like some grotesque scarecrow, his arms dangling absurdly in
front of him.  Through the window we could dimly discern that a young man
was seated inside.  The door was swinging open and his hand was grasping
the handle, as if he had attempted to leap forth at the last instant.  In
the middle distance lay the golf links, dotted as they had been in the
morning with the dark figures of the golfers, lying motionless upon the
grass of the course or among the heather which skirted it.  On one
particular green there were eight bodies stretched where a foursome with
its caddies had held to their game to the last.  No bird flew in the blue
vault of heaven, no man or beast moved upon the vast countryside which
lay before us.  The evening sun shone its peaceful radiance across it,
but there brooded over it all the stillness and the silence of universal
death--a death in which we were so soon to join.  At the present instant
that one frail sheet of glass, by holding in the extra oxygen which
counteracted the poisoned ether, shut us off from the fate of all our
kind.  For a few short hours the knowledge and foresight of one man could
preserve our little oasis of life in the vast desert of death and save us
from participation in the common catastrophe.  Then the gas would run
low, we too should lie gasping upon that cherry-coloured boudoir carpet,
and the fate of the human race and of all earthly life would be complete.
For a long time, in a mood which was too solemn for speech, we looked out
at the tragic world.

"There is a house on fire," said Challenger at last, pointing to a column
of smoke which rose above the trees.  "There will, I expect, be many
such--possibly whole cities in flames--when we consider how many folk may
have dropped with lights in their hands.  The fact of combustion is in
itself enough to show that the proportion of oxygen in the atmosphere is
normal and that it is the ether which is at fault.  Ah, there you see
another blaze on the top of Crowborough Hill.  It is the golf clubhouse,
or I am mistaken.  There is the church clock chiming the hour.  It would
interest our philosophers to know that man-made mechanisms have survived
the race who made it."

"By George!" cried Lord John, rising excitedly from his chair.  "What's
that puff of smoke?  It's a train."

We heard the roar of it, and presently it came flying into sight, going
at what seemed to me to be a prodigious speed.  Whence it had come, or
how far, we had no means of knowing.  Only by some miracle of luck could
it have gone any distance.  But now we were to see the terrific end of
its career.  A train of coal trucks stood motionless upon the line.  We
held our breath as the express roared along the same track.  The crash
was horrible.  Engine and carriages piled themselves into a hill of
splintered wood and twisted iron.  Red spurts of flame flickered up from
the wreckage until it was all ablaze.  For half an hour we sat with
hardly a word, stunned by the stupendous sight.

"Poor, poor people!" cried Mrs. Challenger at last, clinging with a
whimper to her husband's arm.

"My dear, the passengers on that train were no more animate than the
coals into which they crashed or the carbon which they have now become,"
said Challenger, stroking her hand soothingly.  "It was a train of the
living when it left Victoria, but it was driven and freighted by the dead
long before it reached its fate."

"All over the world the same thing must be going on," said I as a vision
of strange happenings rose before me.  "Think of the ships at sea--how
they will steam on and on, until the furnaces die down or until they run
full tilt upon some beach.  The sailing ships too--how they will back and
fill with their cargoes of dead sailors, while their timbers rot and
their joints leak, till one by one they sink below the surface.  Perhaps
a century hence the Atlantic may still be dotted with the old drifting
derelicts."

"And the folk in the coal-mines," said Summerlee with a dismal chuckle.
"If ever geologists should by any chance live upon earth again they will
have some strange theories of the existence of man in carboniferous
strata."

"I don't profess to know about such things," remarked Lord John, "but it
seems to me the earth will be 'To let, empty,' after this.  When once our
human crowd is wiped off it, how will it ever get on again?"

"The world was empty before," Challenger answered gravely.  "Under laws
which in their inception are beyond and above us, it became peopled.  Why
may the same process not happen again?"

"My dear Challenger, you can't mean that?"

"I am not in the habit, Professor Summerlee, of saying things which I do
not mean.  The observation is trivial."  Out went the beard and down came
the eyelids.

"Well, you lived an obstinate dogmatist, and you mean to die one," said
Summerlee sourly.

"And you, sir, have lived an unimaginative obstructionist and never can
hope now to emerge from it."

"Your worst critics will never accuse you of lacking imagination,"
Summerlee retorted.

"Upon my word!" said Lord John.  "It would be like you if you used up our
last gasp of oxygen in abusing each other.  What can it matter whether
folk come back or not?  It surely won't be in our time."

"In that remark, sir, you betray your own very pronounced limitations,"
said Challenger severely.  "The true scientific mind is not to be tied
down by its own conditions of time and space.  It builds itself an
observatory erected upon the border line of present, which separates the
infinite past from the infinite future.  From this sure post it makes its
sallies even to the beginning and to the end of all things.  As to death,
the scientific mind dies at its post working in normal and methodic
fashion to the end.  It disregards so petty a thing as its own physical
dissolution as completely as it does all other limitations upon the plane
of matter.  Am I right, Professor Summerlee?"

Summerlee grumbled an ungracious assent.

"With certain reservations, I agree," said he.

"The ideal scientific mind," continued Challenger--"I put it in the third
person rather than appear to be too self-complacent--the ideal scientific
mind should be capable of thinking out a point of abstract knowledge in
the interval between its owner falling from a balloon and reaching the
earth.  Men of this strong fibre are needed to form the conquerors of
nature and the bodyguard of truth."

"It strikes me nature's on top this time," said Lord John, looking out of
the window.  "I've read some leadin' articles about you gentlemen
controllin' her, but she's gettin' a bit of her own back."

"It is but a temporary setback," said Challenger with conviction.  "A few
million years, what are they in the great cycle of time?  The vegetable
world has, as you can see, survived.  Look at the leaves of that plane
tree.  The birds are dead, but the plant flourishes.  From this vegetable
life in pond and in marsh will come, in time, the tiny crawling
microscopic slugs which are the pioneers of that great army of life in
which for the instant we five have the extraordinary duty of serving as
rear guard.  Once the lowest form of life has established itself, the
final advent of man is as certain as the growth of the oak from the
acorn.  The old circle will swing round once more."

"But the poison?" I asked.  "Will that not nip life in the bud?"

"The poison may be a mere stratum or layer in the ether--a mephitic Gulf
Stream across that mighty ocean in which we float.  Or tolerance may be
established and life accommodate itself to a new condition.  The mere
fact that with a comparatively small hyperoxygenation of our blood we can
hold out against it is surely a proof in itself that no very great change
would be needed to enable animal life to endure it."

The smoking house beyond the trees had burst into flames.  We could see
the high tongues of fire shooting up into the air.

"It's pretty awful," muttered Lord John, more impressed than I had ever
seen him.

"Well, after all, what does it matter?" I remarked.  "The world is dead.
Cremation is surely the best burial."

"It would shorten us up if this house went ablaze."

"I foresaw the danger," said Challenger, "and asked my wife to guard
against it."

"Everything is quite safe, dear.  But my head begins to throb again.
What a dreadful atmosphere!"

"We must change it," said Challenger.  He bent over his cylinder of
oxygen.

"It's nearly empty," said he.  "It has lasted us some three and a half
hours.  It is now close on eight o'clock.  We shall get through the night
comfortably.  I should expect the end about nine o'clock to-morrow
morning.  We shall see one sunrise, which shall be all our own."

He turned on his second tube and opened for half a minute the fanlight
over the door.  Then as the air became perceptibly better, but our own
symptoms more acute, he closed it once again.

"By the way," said he, "man does not live upon oxygen alone.  It's dinner
time and over.  I assure you, gentlemen, that when I invited you to my
home and to what I had hoped would be an interesting reunion, I had
intended that my kitchen should justify itself.  However, we must do what
we can.  I am sure that you will agree with me that it would be folly to
consume our air too rapidly by lighting an oil-stove.  I have some small
provision of cold meats, bread, and pickles which, with a couple of
bottles of claret, may serve our turn.  Thank you, my dear--now as ever
you are the queen of managers."

It was indeed wonderful how, with the self-respect and sense of propriety
of the British housekeeper, the lady had within a few minutes adorned the
central table with a snow-white cloth, laid the napkins upon it, and set
forth the simple meal with all the elegance of civilization, including an
electric torch lamp in the centre.  Wonderful also was it to find that
our appetites were ravenous.

"It is the measure of our emotion," said Challenger with that air of
condescension with which he brought his scientific mind to the
explanation of humble facts.  "We have gone through a great crisis.  That
means molecular disturbance.  That in turn means the need for repair.
Great sorrow or great joy should bring intense hunger--not abstinence
from food, as our novelists will have it."

"That's why the country folk have great feasts at funerals," I hazarded.

"Exactly.  Our young friend has hit upon an excellent illustration.  Let
me give you another slice of tongue."

"The same with savages," said Lord John, cutting away at the beef.  "I've
seen them buryin' a chief up the Aruwimi River, and they ate a hippo that
must have weighed as much as a tribe.  There are some of them down New
Guinea way that eat the late-lamented himself, just by way of a last tidy
up.  Well, of all the funeral feasts on this earth, I suppose the one we
are takin' is the queerest."

"The strange thing is," said Mrs. Challenger, "that I find it impossible
to feel grief for those who are gone.  There are my father and mother at
Bedford.  I know that they are dead, and yet in this tremendous universal
tragedy I can feel no sharp sorrow for any individuals, even for them."

"And my old mother in her cottage in Ireland," said I.  "I can see her in
my mind's eye, with her shawl and her lace cap, lying back with closed
eyes in the old high-backed chair near the window, her glasses and her
book beside her.  Why should I mourn her?  She has passed and I am
passing, and I may be nearer her in some other life than England is to
Ireland.  Yet I grieve to think that that dear body is no more."

"As to the body," remarked Challenger, "we do not mourn over the parings
of our nails nor the cut locks of our hair, though they were once part of
ourselves.  Neither does a one-legged man yearn sentimentally over his
missing member.  The physical body has rather been a source of pain and
fatigue to us.  It is the constant index of our limitations.  Why then
should we worry about its detachment from our psychical selves?"

"If they can indeed be detached," Summerlee grumbled.  "But, anyhow,
universal death is dreadful."

"As I have already explained," said Challenger, "a universal death must
in its nature be far less terrible than a isolated one."

"Same in a battle," remarked Lord John.  "If you saw a single man lying
on that floor with his chest knocked in and a hole in his face it would
turn you sick.  But I've seen ten thousand on their backs in the Soudan,
and it gave me no such feelin', for when you are makin' history the life
of any man is too small a thing to worry over.  When a thousand million
pass over together, same as happened to-day, you can't pick your own
partic'lar out of the crowd."

"I wish it were well over with us," said the lady wistfully.  "Oh,
George, I am so frightened."

"You'll be the bravest of us all, little lady, when the time comes.  I've
been a blusterous old husband to you, dear, but you'll just bear in mind
that G.  E.  C.  is as he was made and couldn't help himself.  After all,
you wouldn't have had anyone else?"

"No one in the whole wide world, dear," said she, and put her arms round
his bull neck.  We three walked to the window and stood amazed at the
sight which met our eyes.

Darkness had fallen and the dead world was shrouded in gloom.  But right
across the southern horizon was one long vivid scarlet streak, waxing and
waning in vivid pulses of life, leaping suddenly to a crimson zenith and
then dying down to a glowing line of fire.

"Lewes is ablaze!"

"No, it is Brighton which is burning," said Challenger, stepping across
to join us.  "You can see the curved back of the downs against the glow.
That fire is miles on the farther side of it.  The whole town must be
alight."

There were several red glares at different points, and the pile of
_debris_ upon the railway line was still smoldering darkly, but they all
seemed mere pin-points of light compared to that monstrous conflagration
throbbing beyond the hills.  What copy it would have made for the
Gazette!  Had ever a journalist such an opening and so little chance of
using it--the scoop of scoops, and no one to appreciate it?  And then,
suddenly, the old instinct of recording came over me.  If these men of
science could be so true to their life's work to the very end, why should
not I, in my humble way, be as constant?  No human eye might ever rest
upon what I had done.  But the long night had to be passed somehow, and
for me at least, sleep seemed to be out of the question.  My notes would
help to pass the weary hours and to occupy my thoughts.  Thus it is that
now I have before me the notebook with its scribbled pages, written
confusedly upon my knee in the dim, waning light of our one electric
torch.  Had I the literary touch, they might have been worthy of the
occasion. As it is, they may still serve to bring to other minds the
long-drawn emotions and tremors of that awful night.



Chapter IV

A DIARY OF THE DYING


How strange the words look scribbled at the top of the empty page of my
book!  How stranger still that it is I, Edward Malone, who have written
them--I who started only some twelve hours ago from my rooms in Streatham
without one thought of the marvels which the day was to bring forth!  I
look back at the chain of incidents, my interview with McArdle,
Challenger's first note of alarm in the Times, the absurd journey in the
train, the pleasant luncheon, the catastrophe, and now it has come to
this--that we linger alone upon an empty planet, and so sure is our fate
that I can regard these lines, written from mechanical professional habit
and never to be seen by human eyes, as the words of one who is already
dead, so closely does he stand to the shadowed borderland over which all
outside this one little circle of friends have already gone.  I feel how
wise and true were the words of Challenger when he said that the real
tragedy would be if we were left behind when all that is noble and good
and beautiful had passed.  But of that there can surely be no danger.
Already our second tube of oxygen is drawing to an end.  We can count the
poor dregs of our lives almost to a minute.

We have just been treated to a lecture, a good quarter of an hour long,
from Challenger, who was so excited that he roared and bellowed as if he
were addressing his old rows of scientific sceptics in the Queen's Hall.
He had certainly a strange audience to harangue:  his wife perfectly
acquiescent and absolutely ignorant of his meaning, Summerlee seated in
the shadow, querulous and critical but interested, Lord John lounging in
a corner somewhat bored by the whole proceeding, and myself beside the
window watching the scene with a kind of detached attention, as if it
were all a dream or something in which I had no personal interest
whatever.  Challenger sat at the centre table with the electric light
illuminating the slide under the microscope which he had brought from his
dressing room.  The small vivid circle of white light from the mirror
left half of his rugged, bearded face in brilliant radiance and half in
deepest shadow.  He had, it seems, been working of late upon the lowest
forms of life, and what excited him at the present moment was that in the
microscopic slide made up the day before he found the amoeba to be still
alive.

"You can see it for yourselves," he kept repeating in great excitement.
"Summerlee, will you step across and satisfy yourself upon the point?
Malone, will you kindly verify what I say?  The little spindle-shaped
things in the centre are diatoms and may be disregarded since they are
probably vegetable rather than animal.  But the right-hand side you will
see an undoubted amoeba, moving sluggishly across the field.  The upper
screw is the fine adjustment.  Look at it for yourselves."

Summerlee did so and acquiesced.  So did I and perceived a little
creature which looked as if it were made of ground glass flowing in a
sticky way across the lighted circle.  Lord John was prepared to take him
on trust.

"I'm not troublin' my head whether he's alive or dead," said he.  "We
don't so much as know each other by sight, so why should I take it to
heart?  I don't suppose he's worryin' himself over the state of _our_
health."

I laughed at this, and Challenger looked in my direction with his coldest
and most supercilious stare.  It was a most petrifying experience.

"The flippancy of the half-educated is more obstructive to science than
the obtuseness of the ignorant," said he.  "If Lord John Roxton would
condescend----"

"My dear George, don't be so peppery," said his wife, with her hand on
the black mane that drooped over the microscope.  "What can it matter
whether the amoeba is alive or not?"

"It matters a great deal," said Challenger gruffly.

"Well, let's hear about it," said Lord John with a good-humoured smile.
"We may as well talk about that as anything else.  If you think I've been
too off-hand with the thing, or hurt its feelin's in any way, I'll
apologize."

"For my part," remarked Summerlee in his creaky, argumentative voice, "I
can't see why you should attach such importance to the creature being
alive.  It is in the same atmosphere as ourselves, so naturally the
poison does not act upon it.  If it were outside of this room it would be
dead, like all other animal life."

"Your remarks, my good Summerlee," said Challenger with enormous
condescension (oh, if I could paint that over-bearing, arrogant face in
the vivid circle of reflection from the microscope mirror!)--"your
remarks show that you imperfectly appreciate the situation.  This
specimen was mounted yesterday and is hermetically sealed.  None of our
oxygen can reach it.  But the ether, of course, has penetrated to it, as
to every other point upon the universe.  Therefore, it has survived the
poison.  Hence, we may argue that every amoeba outside this room, instead
of being dead, as you have erroneously stated, has really survived the
catastrophe."

"Well, even now I don't feel inclined to hip-hurrah about it," said Lord
John.  "What does it matter?"

"It just matters this, that the world is a living instead of a dead one.
If you had the scientific imagination, you would cast your mind forward
from this one fact, and you would see some few millions of years hence--a
mere passing moment in the enormous flux of the ages--the whole world
teeming once more with the animal and human life which will spring from
this tiny root.  You have seen a prairie fire where the flames have swept
every trace of grass or plant from the surface of the earth and left only
a blackened waste.  You would think that it must be forever desert.  Yet
the roots of growth have been left behind, and when you pass the place a
few years hence you can no longer tell where the black scars used to be.
Here in this tiny creature are the roots of growth of the animal world,
and by its inherent development, and evolution, it will surely in time
remove every trace of this incomparable crisis in which we are now
involved."

"Dooced interestin'!" said Lord John, lounging across and looking through
the microscope.  "Funny little chap to hang number one among the family
portraits.  Got a fine big shirt-stud on him!"

"The dark object is his nucleus," said Challenger with the air of a nurse
teaching letters to a baby.

"Well, we needn't feel lonely," said Lord John laughing.  "There's
somebody livin' besides us on the earth."

"You seem to take it for granted, Challenger," said Summerlee, "that the
object for which this world was created was that it should produce and
sustain human life."

"Well, sir, and what object do you suggest?" asked Challenger, bristling
at the least hint of contradiction.

"Sometimes I think that it is only the monstrous conceit of mankind which
makes him think that all this stage was erected for him to strut upon."

"We cannot be dogmatic about it, but at least without what you have
ventured to call monstrous conceit we can surely say that we are the
highest thing in nature."

"The highest of which we have cognizance."

"That, sir, goes without saying."

"Think of all the millions and possibly billions of years that the earth
swung empty through space--or, if not empty, at least without a sign or
thought of the human race.  Think of it, washed by the rain and scorched
by the sun and swept by the wind for those unnumbered ages.  Man only
came into being yesterday so far as geological times goes.  Why, then,
should it be taken for granted that all this stupendous preparation was
for his benefit?"

"For whose then--or for what?"

Summerlee shrugged his shoulders.

"How can we tell?  For some reason altogether beyond our conception--and
man may have been a mere accident, a by-product evolved in the process.
It is as if the scum upon the surface of the ocean imagined that the
ocean was created in order to produce and sustain it, or a mouse in a
cathedral thought that the building was its own proper ordained
residence."

I have jotted down the very words of their argument, but now it
degenerates into a mere noisy wrangle with much polysyllabic scientific
jargon upon each side.  It is no doubt a privilege to hear two such
brains discuss the highest questions; but as they are in perpetual
disagreement, plain folk like Lord John and I get little that is positive
from the exhibition.  They neutralize each other and we are left as they
found us.  Now the hubbub has ceased, and Summerlee is coiled up in his
chair, while Challenger, still fingering the screws of his microscope, is
keeping up a continual low, deep, inarticulate growl like the sea after a
storm.  Lord John comes over to me, and we look out together into the
night.

There is a pale new moon--the last moon that human eyes will ever rest
upon--and the stars are most brilliant.  Even in the clear plateau air of
South America I have never seen them brighter.  Possibly this etheric
change has some effect upon light.  The funeral pyre of Brighton is still
blazing, and there is a very distant patch of scarlet in the western sky,
which may mean trouble at Arundel or Chichester, possibly even at
Portsmouth.  I sit and muse and make an occasional note.  There is a
sweet melancholy in the air.  Youth and beauty and chivalry and love--is
this to be the end of it all?  The starlit earth looks a dreamland of
gentle peace.  Who would imagine it as the terrible Golgotha strewn with
the bodies of the human race?  Suddenly, I find myself laughing.

"Halloa, young fellah!" says Lord John, staring at me in surprise.  "We
could do with a joke in these hard times.  What was it, then?"

"I was thinking of all the great unsolved questions," I answer, "the
questions that we spent so much labor and thought over.  Think of
Anglo-German competition, for example--or the Persian Gulf that my old
chief was so keen about.  Whoever would have guessed, when we fumed and
fretted so, how they were to be eventually solved?"

We fall into silence again.  I fancy that each of us is thinking of
friends that have gone before.  Mrs. Challenger is sobbing quietly, and
her husband is whispering to her.  My mind turns to all the most unlikely
people, and I see each of them lying white and rigid as poor Austin does
in the yard.  There is McArdle, for example, I know exactly where he is,
with his face upon his writing desk and his hand on his own telephone,
just as I heard him fall.  Beaumont, the editor, too--I suppose he is
lying upon the blue-and-red Turkey carpet which adorned his sanctum.  And
the fellows in the reporters' room--Macdona and Murray and Bond.  They
had certainly died hard at work on their job, with note-books full of
vivid impressions and strange happenings in their hands.  I could just
imagine how this one would have been packed off to the doctors, and that
other to Westminster, and yet a third to St.  Paul's.  What glorious rows
of head-lines they must have seen as a last vision beautiful, never
destined to materialize in printer's ink!  I could see Macdona among the
doctors--"Hope in Harley Street"--Mac had always a weakness for
alliteration.  "Interview with Mr. Soley Wilson." "Famous Specialist says
'Never despair!'" "Our Special Correspondent found the eminent scientist
seated upon the roof, whither he had retreated to avoid the crowd of
terrified patients who had stormed his dwelling.  With a manner which
plainly showed his appreciation of the immense gravity of the occasion,
the celebrated physician refused to admit that every avenue of hope had
been closed."  That's how Mac would start.  Then there was Bond; he would
probably do St.  Paul's.  He fancied his own literary touch.  My word,
what a theme for him!  "Standing in the little gallery under the dome and
looking down upon that packed mass of despairing humanity, groveling at
this last instant before a Power which they had so persistently ignored,
there rose to my ears from the swaying crowd such a low moan of entreaty
and terror, such a shuddering cry for help to the Unknown, that----" and
so forth.

Yes, it would be a great end for a reporter, though, like myself, he
would die with the treasures still unused.  What would Bond not give,
poor chap, to see "J.  H.  B." at the foot of a column like that?

But what drivel I am writing!  It is just an attempt to pass the weary
time.  Mrs. Challenger has gone to the inner dressing-room, and the
Professor says that she is asleep.  He is making notes and consulting
books at the central table, as calmly as if years of placid work lay
before him.  He writes with a very noisy quill pen which seems to be
screeching scorn at all who disagree with him.

Summerlee has dropped off in his chair and gives from time to time a
peculiarly exasperating snore.  Lord John lies back with his hands in his
pockets and his eyes closed.  How people can sleep under such conditions
is more than I can imagine.

Three-thirty a.m.  I have just wakened with a start.  It was five minutes
past eleven when I made my last entry.  I remember winding up my watch
and noting the time.  So I have wasted some five hours of the little span
still left to us.  Who would have believed it possible?  But I feel very
much fresher, and ready for my fate--or try to persuade myself that I am.
And yet, the fitter a man is, and the higher his tide of life, the more
must he shrink from death.  How wise and how merciful is that provision
of nature by which his earthly anchor is usually loosened by many little
imperceptible tugs, until his consciousness has drifted out of its
untenable earthly harbor into the great sea beyond!

Mrs. Challenger is still in the dressing room.  Challenger has fallen
asleep in his chair.  What a picture!  His enormous frame leans back, his
huge, hairy hands are clasped across his waistcoat, and his head is so
tilted that I can see nothing above his collar save a tangled bristle of
luxuriant beard.  He shakes with the vibration of his own snoring.
Summerlee adds his occasional high tenor to Challenger's sonorous bass.
Lord John is sleeping also, his long body doubled up sideways in a
basket-chair.  The first cold light of dawn is just stealing into the
room, and everything is grey and mournful.

I look out at the sunrise--that fateful sunrise which will shine upon an
unpeopled world.  The human race is gone, extinguished in a day, but the
planets swing round and the tides rise or fall, and the wind whispers,
and all nature goes her way, down, as it would seem, to the very amoeba,
with never a sign that he who styled himself the lord of creation had
ever blessed or cursed the universe with his presence.  Down in the yard
lies Austin with sprawling limbs, his face glimmering white in the dawn,
and the hose nozzle still projecting from his dead hand.  The whole of
human kind is typified in that one half-ludicrous and half-pathetic
figure, lying so helpless beside the machine which it used to control.


Here end the notes which I made at the time.  Henceforward events were
too swift and too poignant to allow me to write, but they are too clearly
outlined in my memory that any detail could escape me.

Some chokiness in my throat made me look at the oxygen cylinders, and I
was startled at what I saw.  The sands of our lives were running very
low.  At some period in the night Challenger had switched the tube from
the third to the fourth cylinder.  Now it was clear that this also was
nearly exhausted.  That horrible feeling of constriction was closing in
upon me.  I ran across and, unscrewing the nozzle, I changed it to our
last supply.  Even as I did so my conscience pricked me, for I felt that
perhaps if I had held my hand all of them might have passed in their
sleep.  The thought was banished, however, by the voice of the lady from
the inner room crying:--

"George, George, I am stifling!"

"It is all right, Mrs. Challenger," I answered as the others started to
their feet.  "I have just turned on a fresh supply."

Even at such a moment I could not help smiling at Challenger, who with a
great hairy fist in each eye was like a huge, bearded baby, new wakened
out of sleep.  Summerlee was shivering like a man with the ague, human
fears, as he realized his position, rising for an instant above the
stoicism of the man of science.  Lord John, however, was as cool and
alert as if he had just been roused on a hunting morning.

"Fifthly and lastly," said he, glancing at the tube.  "Say, young fellah,
don't tell me you've been writin' up your impressions in that paper on
your knee."

"Just a few notes to pass the time."

"Well, I don't believe anyone but an Irishman would have done that.  I
expect you'll have to wait till little brother amoeba gets grown up
before you'll find a reader.  He don't seem to take much stock of things
just at present.  Well, Herr Professor, what are the prospects?"

Challenger was looking out at the great drifts of morning mist which lay
over the landscape.  Here and there the wooded hills rose like conical
islands out of this woolly sea.

"It might be a winding sheet," said Mrs. Challenger, who had entered in
her dressing-gown.  "There's that song of yours, George, 'Ring out the
old, ring in the new.' It was prophetic.  But you are shivering, my poor
dear friends.  I have been warm under a coverlet all night, and you cold
in your chairs.  But I'll soon set you right."

The brave little creature hurried away, and presently we heard the
sizzling of a kettle.  She was back soon with five steaming cups of cocoa
upon a tray.

"Drink these," said she.  "You will feel so much better."

And we did.  Summerlee asked if he might light his pipe, and we all had
cigarettes.  It steadied our nerves, I think, but it was a mistake, for
it made a dreadful atmosphere in that stuffy room.  Challenger had to
open the ventilator.

"How long, Challenger?" asked Lord John.

"Possibly three hours," he answered with a shrug.

"I used to be frightened," said his wife.  "But the nearer I get to it,
the easier it seems.  Don't you think we ought to pray, George?"

"You will pray, dear, if you wish," the big man answered, very gently.
"We all have our own ways of praying.  Mine is a complete acquiescence in
whatever fate may send me--a cheerful acquiescence.  The highest religion
and the highest science seem to unite on that."

"I cannot truthfully describe my mental attitude as acquiescence and far
less cheerful acquiescence," grumbled Summerlee over his pipe.  "I submit
because I have to.  I confess that I should have liked another year of
life to finish my classification of the chalk fossils."

"Your unfinished work is a small thing," said Challenger pompously, "when
weighed against the fact that my own _magnum opus_, 'The Ladder of Life,'
is still in the first stages.  My brain, my reading, my experience--in
fact, my whole unique equipment--were to be condensed into that
epoch-making volume.  And yet, as I say, I acquiesce."

"I expect we've all left some loose ends stickin' out," said Lord John.
"What are yours, young fellah?"

"I was working at a book of verses," I answered.

"Well, the world has escaped that, anyhow," said Lord John.  "There's
always compensation somewhere if you grope around."

"What about you?" I asked.

"Well, it just so happens that I was tidied up and ready.  I'd promised
Merivale to go to Tibet for a snow leopard in the spring.  But it's hard
on you, Mrs. Challenger, when you have just built up this pretty home."

"Where George is, there is my home.  But, oh, what would I not give for
one last walk together in the fresh morning air upon those beautiful
downs!"

Our hearts re-echoed her words.  The sun had burst through the gauzy
mists which veiled it, and the whole broad Weald was washed in golden
light.  Sitting in our dark and poisonous atmosphere that glorious,
clean, wind-swept countryside seemed a very dream of beauty.  Mrs.
Challenger held her hand stretched out to it in her longing.  We drew up
chairs and sat in a semicircle in the window.  The atmosphere was already
very close.  It seemed to me that the shadows of death were drawing in
upon us--the last of our race.  It was like an invisible curtain closing
down upon every side.

"That cylinder is not lastin' too well," said Lord John with a long gasp
for breath.

"The amount contained is variable," said Challenger, "depending upon the
pressure and care with which it has been bottled.  I am inclined to agree
with you, Roxton, that this one is defective."

"So we are to be cheated out of the last hour of our lives," Summerlee
remarked bitterly.  "An excellent final illustration of the sordid age in
which we have lived.  Well, Challenger, now is your time if you wish to
study the subjective phenomena of physical dissolution."

"Sit on the stool at my knee and give me your hand," said Challenger to
his wife.  "I think, my friends, that a further delay in this
insufferable atmosphere is hardly advisable.  You would not desire it,
dear, would you?"

His wife gave a little groan and sank her face against his leg.

"I've seen the folk bathin' in the Serpentine in winter," said Lord John.
"When the rest are in, you see one or two shiverin' on the bank, envyin'
the others that have taken the plunge.  It's the last that have the worst
of it.  I'm all for a header and have done with it."

"You would open the window and face the ether?"

"Better be poisoned than stifled."

Summerlee nodded his reluctant acquiescence and held out his thin hand to
Challenger.

"We've had our quarrels in our time, but that's all over," said he.  "We
were good friends and had a respect for each other under the surface.
Good-by!"

"Good-by, young fellah!" said Lord John.  "The window's plastered up.
You can't open it."

Challenger stooped and raised his wife, pressing her to his breast, while
she threw her arms round his neck.

"Give me that field-glass, Malone," said he gravely.

I handed it to him.

"Into the hands of the Power that made us we render ourselves again!" he
shouted in his voice of thunder, and at the words he hurled the
field-glass through the window.

Full in our flushed faces, before the last tinkle of falling fragments
had died away, there came the wholesome breath of the wind, blowing
strong and sweet.

I don't know how long we sat in amazed silence.  Then as in a dream, I
heard Challenger's voice once more.

"We are back in normal conditions," he cried.  "The world has cleared the
poison belt, but we alone of all mankind are saved."



Chapter V

THE DEAD WORLD


I remember that we all sat gasping in our chairs, with that sweet, wet
south-western breeze, fresh from the sea, flapping the muslin curtains
and cooling our flushed faces.  I wonder how long we sat!  None of us
afterwards could agree at all on that point.  We were bewildered,
stunned, semi-conscious.  We had all braced our courage for death, but
this fearful and sudden new fact--that we must continue to live after we
had survived the race to which we belonged--struck us with the shock of a
physical blow and left us prostrate.  Then gradually the suspended
mechanism began to move once more; the shuttles of memory worked; ideas
weaved themselves together in our minds.  We saw, with vivid, merciless
clearness, the relations between the past, the present, and the
future--the lives that we had led and the lives which we would have to
live.  Our eyes turned in silent horror upon those of our companions and
found the same answering look in theirs.  Instead of the joy which men
might have been expected to feel who had so narrowly escaped an imminent
death, a terrible wave of darkest depression submerged us.  Everything on
earth that we loved had been washed away into the great, infinite,
unknown ocean, and here were we marooned upon this desert island of a
world, without companions, hopes, or aspirations.  A few years' skulking
like jackals among the graves of the human race and then our belated and
lonely end would come.

"It's dreadful, George, dreadful!" the lady cried in an agony of sobs.
"If we had only passed with the others!  Oh, why did you save us?  I feel
as if it is we that are dead and everyone else alive."

Challenger's great eyebrows were drawn down in concentrated thought,
while his huge, hairy paw closed upon the outstretched hand of his wife.
I had observed that she always held out her arms to him in trouble as a
child would to its mother.

"Without being a fatalist to the point of nonresistance," said he, "I
have always found that the highest wisdom lies in an acquiescence with
the actual."  He spoke slowly, and there was a vibration of feeling in
his sonorous voice.

"I do _not_ acquiesce," said Summerlee firmly.

"I don't see that it matters a row of pins whether you acquiesce or
whether you don't," remarked Lord John.  "You've got to take it, whether
you take it fightin' or take it lyin' down, so what's the odds whether
you acquiesce or not?

"I can't remember that anyone asked our permission before the thing
began, and nobody's likely to ask it now.  So what difference can it make
what we may think of it?"

"It is just all the difference between happiness and misery," said
Challenger with an abstracted face, still patting his wife's hand.  "You
can swim with the tide and have peace in mind and soul, or you can thrust
against it and be bruised and weary.  This business is beyond us, so let
us accept it as it stands and say no more."

"But what in the world are we to do with our lives?" I asked, appealing
in desperation to the blue, empty heaven.

"What am I to do, for example?  There are no newspapers, so there's an
end of my vocation."

"And there's nothin' left to shoot, and no more soldierin', so there's an
end of mine," said Lord John.

"And there are no students, so there's an end of mine," cried Summerlee.

"But I have my husband and my house, so I can thank heaven that there is
no end of mine," said the lady.

"Nor is there an end of mine," remarked Challenger, "for science is not
dead, and this catastrophe in itself will offer us many most absorbing
problems for investigation."

He had now flung open the windows and we were gazing out upon the silent
and motionless landscape.

"Let me consider," he continued.  "It was about three, or a little after,
yesterday afternoon that the world finally entered the poison belt to the
extent of being completely submerged.  It is now nine o'clock.  The
question is, at what hour did we pass out from it?"

"The air was very bad at daybreak," said I.

"Later than that," said Mrs. Challenger.  "As late as eight o'clock I
distinctly felt the same choking at my throat which came at the outset."

"Then we shall say that it passed just after eight o'clock.  For
seventeen hours the world has been soaked in the poisonous ether.  For
that length of time the Great Gardener has sterilized the human mold
which had grown over the surface of His fruit.  Is it possible that the
work is incompletely done--that others may have survived besides
ourselves?"

"That's what I was wonderin'," said Lord John.  "Why should we be the only
pebbles on the beach?"

"It is absurd to suppose that anyone besides ourselves can possibly have
survived," said Summerlee with conviction.  "Consider that the poison was
so virulent that even a man who is as strong as an ox and has not a nerve
in his body, like Malone here, could hardly get up the stairs before he
fell unconscious.  Is it likely that anyone could stand seventeen minutes
of it, far less hours?"

"Unless someone saw it coming and made preparation, same as old friend
Challenger did."

"That, I think, is hardly probable," said Challenger, projecting his
beard and sinking his eyelids.  "The combination of observation,
inference, and anticipatory imagination which enabled me to foresee the
danger is what one can hardly expect twice in the same generation."

"Then your conclusion is that everyone is certainly dead?"

"There can be little doubt of that.  We have to remember, however, that
the poison worked from below upwards and would possibly be less virulent
in the higher strata of the atmosphere.  It is strange, indeed, that it
should be so; but it presents one of those features which will afford us
in the future a fascinating field for study.  One could imagine,
therefore, that if one had to search for survivors one would turn one's
eyes with best hopes of success to some Tibetan village or some Alpine
farm, many thousands of feet above the sea level."

"Well, considerin' that there are no railroads and no steamers you might
as well talk about survivors in the moon," said Lord John.  "But what I'm
askin' myself is whether it's really over or whether it's only half-time."

Summerlee craned his neck to look round the horizon.  "It seems clear and
fine," said he in a very dubious voice; "but so it did yesterday.  I am
by no means assured that it is all over."

Challenger shrugged his shoulders.

"We must come back once more to our fatalism," said he.  "If the world
has undergone this experience before, which is not outside the range of
possibility, it was certainly a very long time ago.  Therefore, we may
reasonably hope that it will be very long before it occurs again."

"That's all very well," said Lord John, "but if you get an earthquake
shock you are mighty likely to have a second one right on the top of it.
I think we'd be wise to stretch our legs and have a breath of air while
we have the chance.  Since our oxygen is exhausted we may just as well be
caught outside as in."

It was strange the absolute lethargy which had come upon us as a reaction
after our tremendous emotions of the last twenty-four hours.  It was both
mental and physical, a deep-lying feeling that nothing mattered and that
everything was a weariness and a profitless exertion.  Even Challenger
had succumbed to it, and sat in his chair, with his great head leaning
upon his hands and his thoughts far away, until Lord John and I, catching
him by each arm, fairly lifted him on to his feet, receiving only the
glare and growl of an angry mastiff for our trouble.  However, once we
had got out of our narrow haven of refuge into the wider atmosphere of
everyday life, our normal energy came gradually back to us once more.

But what were we to begin to do in that graveyard of a world?  Could ever
men have been faced with such a question since the dawn of time?  It is
true that our own physical needs, and even our luxuries, were assured for
the future.  All the stores of food, all the vintages of wine, all the
treasures of art were ours for the taking.  But what were we to _do_?
Some few tasks appealed to us at once, since they lay ready to our hands.
We descended into the kitchen and laid the two domestics upon their
respective beds.  They seemed to have died without suffering, one in the
chair by the fire, the other upon the scullery floor.  Then we carried in
poor Austin from the yard.  His muscles were set as hard as a board in
the most exaggerated rigor mortis, while the contraction of the fibres
had drawn his mouth into a hard sardonic grin.  This symptom was
prevalent among all who had died from the poison.  Wherever we went we
were confronted by those grinning faces, which seemed to mock at our
dreadful position, smiling silently and grimly at the ill-fated survivors
of their race.

"Look here," said Lord John, who had paced restlessly about the
dining-room whilst we partook of some food, "I don't know how you fellows
feel about it, but for my part, I simply _can't_ sit here and do nothin'."

"Perhaps," Challenger answered, "you would have the kindness to suggest
what you think we ought to do."

"Get a move on us and see all that has happened."

"That is what I should myself propose."

"But not in this little country village.  We can see from the window all
that this place can teach us."

"Where should we go, then?"

"To London!"

"That's all very well," grumbled Summerlee.  "You may be equal to a
forty-mile walk, but I'm not so sure about Challenger, with his stumpy
legs, and I am perfectly sure about myself." Challenger was very much
annoyed.

"If you could see your way, sir, to confining your remarks to your own
physical peculiarities, you would find that you had an ample field for
comment," he cried.

"I had no intention to offend you, my dear Challenger," cried our
tactless friend. "You can't be held responsible for your own physique.
If nature has given you a short, heavy body you cannot possibly help
having stumpy legs."

Challenger was too furious to answer.  He could only growl and blink and
bristle.  Lord John hastened to intervene before the dispute became more
violent.

"You talk of walking.  Why should we walk?" said he.

"Do you suggest taking a train?" asked Challenger, still simmering.

"What's the matter with the motor-car?  Why should we not go in that?"

"I am not an expert," said Challenger, pulling at his beard reflectively.
"At the same time, you are right in supposing that the human intellect in
its higher manifestations should be sufficiently flexible to turn itself
to anything.  Your idea is an excellent one, Lord John.  I myself will
drive you all to London."

"You will do nothing of the kind," said Summerlee with decision.

"No, indeed, George!" cried his wife.  "You only tried once, and you
remember how you crashed through the gate of the garage."

"It was a momentary want of concentration," said Challenger complacently.
"You can consider the matter settled.  I will certainly drive you all to
London."

The situation was relieved by Lord John.

"What's the car?" he asked.

"A twenty-horsepower Humber."

"Why, I've driven one for years," said he.  "By George!" he added.  "I
never thought I'd live to take the whole human race in one load.  There's
just room for five, as I remember it.  Get your things on, and I'll be
ready at the door by ten o'clock."

Sure enough, at the hour named, the car came purring and crackling from
the yard with Lord John at the wheel.  I took my seat beside him, while
the lady, a useful little buffer state, was squeezed in between the two
men of wrath at the back.  Then Lord John released his brakes, slid his
lever rapidly from first to third, and we sped off upon the strangest
drive that ever human beings have taken since man first came upon the
earth.

You are to picture the loveliness of nature upon that August day, the
freshness of the morning air, the golden glare of the summer sunshine,
the cloudless sky, the luxuriant green of the Sussex woods, and the deep
purple of heather-clad downs.  As you looked round upon the many-coloured
beauty of the scene all thought of a vast catastrophe would have passed
from your mind had it not been for one sinister sign--the solemn,
all-embracing silence.  There is a gentle hum of life which pervades a
closely-settled country, so deep and constant that one ceases to observe
it, as the dweller by the sea loses all sense of the constant murmur of
the waves.  The twitter of birds, the buzz of insects, the far-off echo
of voices, the lowing of cattle, the distant barking of dogs, roar of
trains, and rattle of carts--all these form one low, unremitting note,
striking unheeded upon the ear.  We missed it now.  This deadly silence
was appalling.  So solemn was it, so impressive, that the buzz and rattle
of our motor-car seemed an unwarrantable intrusion, an indecent disregard
of this reverent stillness which lay like a pall over and round the ruins
of humanity.  It was this grim hush, and the tall clouds of smoke which
rose here and there over the country-side from smoldering buildings,
which cast a chill into our hearts as we gazed round at the glorious
panorama of the Weald.

And then there were the dead!  At first those endless groups of drawn and
grinning faces filled us with a shuddering horror.  So vivid and mordant
was the impression that I can live over again that slow descent of the
station hill, the passing by the nurse-girl with the two babes, the sight
of the old horse on his knees between the shafts, the cabman twisted
across his seat, and the young man inside with his hand upon the open
door in the very act of springing out.  Lower down were six reapers all
in a litter, their limbs crossing, their dead, unwinking eyes gazing
upwards at the glare of heaven.  These things I see as in a photograph.
But soon, by the merciful provision of nature, the over-excited nerve
ceased to respond.  The very vastness of the horror took away from its
personal appeal.  Individuals merged into groups, groups into crowds,
crowds into a universal phenomenon which one soon accepted as the
inevitable detail of every scene.  Only here and there, where some
particularly brutal or grotesque incident caught the attention, did the
mind come back with a sudden shock to the personal and human meaning of
it all.

Above all, there was the fate of the children.  That, I remember, filled
us with the strongest sense of intolerable injustice.  We could have
wept--Mrs. Challenger did weep--when we passed a great council school and
saw the long trail of tiny figures scattered down the road which led from
it.  They had been dismissed by their terrified teachers and were
speeding for their homes when the poison caught them in its net.  Great
numbers of people were at the open windows of the houses.  In Tunbridge
Wells there was hardly one which had not its staring, smiling face.  At
the last instant the need of air, that very craving for oxygen which we
alone had been able to satisfy, had sent them flying to the window.  The
sidewalks too were littered with men and women, hatless and bonnetless,
who had rushed out of the houses.  Many of them had fallen in the
roadway.  It was a lucky thing that in Lord John we had found an expert
driver, for it was no easy matter to pick one's way.  Passing through the
villages or towns we could only go at a walking pace, and once, I
remember, opposite the school at Tonbridge, we had to halt some time
while we carried aside the bodies which blocked our path.


A few small, definite pictures stand out in my memory from amid that long
panorama of death upon the Sussex and Kentish high roads.  One was that
of a great, glittering motor-car standing outside the inn at the village
of Southborough.  It bore, as I should guess, some pleasure party upon
their return from Brighton or from Eastbourne.  There were three gaily
dressed women, all young and beautiful, one of them with a Peking spaniel
upon her lap.  With them were a rakish-looking elderly man and a young
aristocrat, his eyeglass still in his eye, his cigarette burned down to
the stub between the fingers of his begloved hand.  Death must have come
on them in an instant and fixed them as they sat.  Save that the elderly
man had at the last moment torn out his collar in an effort to breathe,
they might all have been asleep.  On one side of the car a waiter with
some broken glasses beside a tray was huddled near the step.  On the
other, two very ragged tramps, a man and a woman, lay where they had
fallen, the man with his long, thin arm still outstretched, even as he
had asked for alms in his lifetime.  One instant of time had put
aristocrat, waiter, tramp, and dog upon one common footing of inert and
dissolving protoplasm.

I remember another singular picture, some miles on the London side of
Sevenoaks.  There is a large convent upon the left, with a long, green
slope in front of it.  Upon this slope were assembled a great number of
school children, all kneeling at prayer.  In front of them was a fringe
of nuns, and higher up the slope, facing towards them, a single figure
whom we took to be the Mother Superior.  Unlike the pleasure-seekers in
the motor-car, these people seemed to have had warning of their danger
and to have died beautifully together, the teachers and the taught,
assembled for their last common lesson.

My mind is still stunned by that terrific experience, and I grope vainly
for means of expression by which I can reproduce the emotions which we
felt.  Perhaps it is best and wisest not to try, but merely to indicate
the facts.  Even Summerlee and Challenger were crushed, and we heard
nothing of our companions behind us save an occasional whimper from the
lady.  As to Lord John, he was too intent upon his wheel and the
difficult task of threading his way along such roads to have time or
inclination for conversation.  One phrase he used with such wearisome
iteration that it stuck in my memory and at last almost made me laugh as
a comment upon the day of doom.

"Pretty doin's!  What!"

That was his ejaculation as each fresh tremendous combination of death
and disaster displayed itself before us.  "Pretty doin's!  What!" he
cried, as we descended the station hill at Rotherfield, and it was still
"Pretty doin's!  What!" as we picked our way through a wilderness of
death in the High Street of Lewisham and the Old Kent Road.

It was here that we received a sudden and amazing shock.  Out of the
window of a humble corner house there appeared a fluttering handkerchief
waving at the end of a long, thin human arm.  Never had the sight of
unexpected death caused our hearts to stop and then throb so wildly as
did this amazing indication of life.  Lord John ran the motor to the
curb, and in an instant we had rushed through the open door of the house
and up the staircase to the second-floor front room from which the signal
proceeded.

A very old lady sat in a chair by the open window, and close to her, laid
across a second chair, was a cylinder of oxygen, smaller but of the same
shape as those which had saved our own lives.  She turned her thin,
drawn, bespectacled face toward us as we crowded in at the doorway.

"I feared that I was abandoned here forever," said she, "for I am an
invalid and cannot stir."

"Well, madam," Challenger answered, "it is a lucky chance that we
happened to pass."

"I have one all-important question to ask you," said she.  "Gentlemen, I
beg that you will be frank with me.  What effect will these events have
upon London and North-Western Railway shares?"

We should have laughed had it not been for the tragic eagerness with
which she listened for our answer.  Mrs. Burston, for that was her name,
was an aged widow, whose whole income depended upon a small holding of
this stock.  Her life had been regulated by the rise and fall of the
dividend, and she could form no conception of existence save as it was
affected by the quotation of her shares.  In vain we pointed out to her
that all the money in the world was hers for the taking and was useless
when taken.  Her old mind would not adapt itself to the new idea, and she
wept loudly over her vanished stock.  "It was all I had," she wailed.
"If that is gone I may as well go too."

Amid her lamentations we found out how this frail old plant had lived
where the whole great forest had fallen.  She was a confirmed invalid and
an asthmatic.  Oxygen had been prescribed for her malady, and a tube was
in her room at the moment of the crisis.  She had naturally inhaled some
as had been her habit when there was a difficulty with her breathing.  It
had given her relief, and by doling out her supply she had managed to
survive the night.  Finally she had fallen asleep and been awakened by
the buzz of our motor-car.  As it was impossible to take her on with us,
we saw that she had all necessaries of life and promised to communicate
with her in a couple of days at the latest.  So we left her, still
weeping bitterly over her vanished stock.

As we approached the Thames the block in the streets became thicker and
the obstacles more bewildering.  It was with difficulty that we made our
way across London Bridge.  The approaches to it upon the Middlesex side
were choked from end to end with frozen traffic which made all further
advance in that direction impossible.  A ship was blazing brightly
alongside one of the wharves near the bridge, and the air was full of
drifting smuts and of a heavy acrid smell of burning.  There was a cloud
of dense smoke somewhere near the Houses of Parliament, but it was
impossible from where we were to see what was on fire.

"I don't know how it strikes you," Lord John remarked as he brought his
engine to a standstill, "but it seems to me the country is more cheerful
than the town.  Dead London is gettin' on my nerves.  I'm for a cast
round and then gettin' back to Rotherfield."

"I confess that I do not see what we can hope for here," said Professor
Summerlee.

"At the same time," said Challenger, his great voice booming strangely
amid the silence, "it is difficult for us to conceive that out of seven
millions of people there is only this one old woman who by some
peculiarity of constitution or some accident of occupation has managed to
survive this catastrophe."

"If there should be others, how can we hope to find them, George?" asked
the lady.  "And yet I agree with you that we cannot go back until we have
tried."

Getting out of the car and leaving it by the curb, we walked with some
difficulty along the crowded pavement of King William Street and entered
the open door of a large insurance office.  It was a corner house, and we
chose it as commanding a view in every direction.  Ascending the stair,
we passed through what I suppose to have been the board-room, for eight
elderly men were seated round a long table in the centre of it.  The high
window was open and we all stepped out upon the balcony.  From it we
could see the crowded city streets radiating in every direction, while
below us the road was black from side to side with the tops of the
motionless taxis.  All, or nearly all, had their heads pointed outwards,
showing how the terrified men of the city had at the last moment made a
vain endeavor to rejoin their families in the suburbs or the country.
Here and there amid the humbler cabs towered the great brass-spangled
motor-car of some wealthy magnate, wedged hopelessly among the dammed
stream of arrested traffic.  Just beneath us there was such a one of
great size and luxurious appearance, with its owner, a fat old man,
leaning out, half his gross body through the window, and his podgy hand,
gleaming with diamonds, outstretched as he urged his chauffeur to make a
last effort to break through the press.

A dozen motor-buses towered up like islands in this flood, the passengers
who crowded the roofs lying all huddled together and across each others'
laps like a child's toys in a nursery.  On a broad lamp pedestal in the
centre of the roadway, a burly policeman was standing, leaning his back
against the post in so natural an attitude that it was hard to realize
that he was not alive, while at his feet there lay a ragged newsboy with
his bundle of papers on the ground beside him.  A paper-cart had got
blocked in the crowd, and we could read in large letters, black upon
yellow, "Scene at Lord's.  County Match Interrupted."  This must have
been the earliest edition, for there were other placards bearing the
legend, "Is It the End?  Great Scientist's Warning."  And another, "Is
Challenger Justified?  Ominous Rumours."

Challenger pointed the latter placard out to his wife, as it thrust
itself like a banner above the throng.  I could see him throw out his
chest and stroke his beard as he looked at it.  It pleased and flattered
that complex mind to think that London had died with his name and his
words still present in their thoughts.  His feelings were so evident that
they aroused the sardonic comment of his colleague.

"In the limelight to the last, Challenger," he remarked.

"So it would appear," he answered complacently.  "Well," he added as he
looked down the long vista of the radiating streets, all silent and all
choked up with death, "I really see no purpose to be served by our
staying any longer in London.  I suggest that we return at once to
Rotherfield and then take counsel as to how we shall most profitably
employ the years which lie before us."

Only one other picture shall I give of the scenes which we carried back
in our memories from the dead city.  It is a glimpse which we had of the
interior of the old church of St.  Mary's, which is at the very point
where our car was awaiting us.  Picking our way among the prostrate
figures upon the steps, we pushed open the swing door and entered.  It
was a wonderful sight.  The church was crammed from end to end with
kneeling figures in every posture of supplication and abasement.  At the
last dreadful moment, brought suddenly face to face with the realities of
life, those terrific realities which hang over us even while we follow
the shadows, the terrified people had rushed into those old city churches
which for generations had hardly ever held a congregation.  There they
huddled as close as they could kneel, many of them in their agitation
still wearing their hats, while above them in the pulpit a young man in
lay dress had apparently been addressing them when he and they had been
overwhelmed by the same fate.  He lay now, like Punch in his booth, with
his head and two limp arms hanging over the ledge of the pulpit.  It was
a nightmare, the grey, dusty church, the rows of agonized figures, the
dimness and silence of it all.  We moved about with hushed whispers,
walking upon our tip-toes.

And then suddenly I had an idea.  At one corner of the church, near the
door, stood the ancient font, and behind it a deep recess in which there
hung the ropes for the bell-ringers.  Why should we not send a message
out over London which would attract to us anyone who might still be
alive?  I ran across, and pulling at the list-covered rope, I was
surprised to find how difficult it was to swing the bell.  Lord John had
followed me.

"By George, young fellah!" said he, pulling off his coat.  "You've hit on
a dooced good notion.  Give me a grip and we'll soon have a move on it."


But, even then, so heavy was the bell that it was not until Challenger
and Summerlee had added their weight to ours that we heard the roaring
and clanging above our heads which told us that the great clapper was
ringing out its music.  Far over dead London resounded our message of
comradeship and hope to any fellow-man surviving.  It cheered our own
hearts, that strong, metallic call, and we turned the more earnestly to
our work, dragged two feet off the earth with each upward jerk of the
rope, but all straining together on the downward heave, Challenger the
lowest of all, bending all his great strength to the task and flopping up
and down like a monstrous bull-frog, croaking with every pull.  It was at
that moment that an artist might have taken a picture of the four
adventurers, the comrades of many strange perils in the past, whom fate
had now chosen for so supreme an experience.  For half an hour we worked,
the sweat dropping from our faces, our arms and backs aching with the
exertion.  Then we went out into the portico of the church and looked
eagerly up and down the silent, crowded streets.  Not a sound, not a
motion, in answer to our summons.

"It's no use.  No one is left," I cried.

"We can do nothing more," said Mrs. Challenger.  "For God's sake, George,
let us get back to Rotherfield.  Another hour of this dreadful, silent
city would drive me mad."

We got into the car without another word.  Lord John backed her round and
turned her to the south.  To us the chapter seemed closed.  Little did we
foresee the strange new chapter which was to open.



Chapter VI

THE GREAT AWAKENING


And now I come to the end of this extraordinary incident, so
overshadowing in its importance, not only in our own small, individual
lives, but in the general history of the human race.  As I said when I
began my narrative, when that history comes to be written, this
occurrence will surely stand out among all other events like a mountain
towering among its foothills.  Our generation has been reserved for a
very special fate since it has been chosen to experience so wonderful a
thing.  How long its effect may last--how long mankind may preserve the
humility and reverence which this great shock has taught it--can only be
shown by the future.  I think it is safe to say that things can never be
quite the same again.  Never can one realize how powerless and ignorant
one is, and how one is upheld by an unseen hand, until for an instant
that hand has seemed to close and to crush.  Death has been imminent upon
us.  We know that at any moment it may be again.  That grim presence
shadows our lives, but who can deny that in that shadow the sense of
duty, the feeling of sobriety and responsibility, the appreciation of the
gravity and of the objects of life, the earnest desire to develop and
improve, have grown and become real with us to a degree that has leavened
our whole society from end to end?  It is something beyond sects and
beyond dogmas.  It is rather an alteration of perspective, a shifting of
our sense of proportion, a vivid realization that we are insignificant
and evanescent creatures, existing on sufferance and at the mercy of the
first chill wind from the unknown.  But if the world has grown graver
with this knowledge it is not, I think, a sadder place in consequence.
Surely we are agreed that the more sober and restrained pleasures of the
present are deeper as well as wiser than the noisy, foolish hustle which
passed so often for enjoyment in the days of old--days so recent and yet
already so inconceivable.  Those empty lives which were wasted in aimless
visiting and being visited, in the worry of great and unnecessary
households, in the arranging and eating of elaborate and tedious meals,
have now found rest and health in the reading, the music, the gentle
family communion which comes from a simpler and saner division of their
time.  With greater health and greater pleasure they are richer than
before, even after they have paid those increased contributions to the
common fund which have so raised the standard of life in these islands.

There is some clash of opinion as to the exact hour of the great
awakening.  It is generally agreed that, apart from the difference of
clocks, there may have been local causes which influenced the action of
the poison.  Certainly, in each separate district the resurrection was
practically simultaneous.  There are numerous witnesses that Big Ben
pointed to ten minutes past six at the moment.  The Astronomer Royal has
fixed the Greenwich time at twelve past six.  On the other hand, Laird
Johnson, a very capable East Anglia observer, has recorded six-twenty as
the hour.  In the Hebrides it was as late as seven.  In our own case
there can be no doubt whatever, for I was seated in Challenger's study
with his carefully tested chronometer in front of me at the moment.  The
hour was a quarter-past six.


An enormous depression was weighing upon my spirits.  The cumulative
effect of all the dreadful sights which we had seen upon our journey was
heavy upon my soul.  With my abounding animal health and great physical
energy any kind of mental clouding was a rare event.  I had the Irish
faculty of seeing some gleam of humor in every darkness.  But now the
obscurity was appalling and unrelieved.  The others were downstairs
making their plans for the future.  I sat by the open window, my chin
resting upon my hand and my mind absorbed in the misery of our situation.
Could we continue to live?  That was the question which I had begun to
ask myself.  Was it possible to exist upon a dead world?  Just as in
physics the greater body draws to itself the lesser, would we not feel an
overpowering attraction from that vast body of humanity which had passed
into the unknown?  How would the end come?  Would it be from a return of
the poison?  Or would the earth be uninhabitable from the mephitic
products of universal decay?  Or, finally, might our awful situation prey
upon and unbalance our minds?  A group of insane folk upon a dead world!
My mind was brooding upon this last dreadful idea when some slight noise
caused me to look down upon the road beneath me.  The old cab horse was
coming up the hill!

I was conscious at the same instant of the twittering of birds, of
someone coughing in the yard below, and of a background of movement in
the landscape.  And yet I remember that it was that absurd, emaciated,
superannuated cab-horse which held my gaze.  Slowly and wheezily it was
climbing the slope.  Then my eye traveled to the driver sitting hunched
up upon the box and finally to the young man who was leaning out of the
window in some excitement and shouting a direction.  They were all
indubitably, aggressively alive!

Everybody was alive once more!  Had it all been a delusion?  Was it
conceivable that this whole poison belt incident had been an elaborate
dream?  For an instant my startled brain was really ready to believe it.
Then I looked down, and there was the rising blister on my hand where it
was frayed by the rope of the city bell.  It had really been so, then.
And yet here was the world resuscitated--here was life come back in an
instant full tide to the planet.  Now, as my eyes wandered all over the
great landscape, I saw it in every direction--and moving, to my
amazement, in the very same groove in which it had halted.  There were
the golfers.  Was it possible that they were going on with their game?
Yes, there was a fellow driving off from a tee, and that other group upon
the green were surely putting for the hole.  The reapers were slowly
trooping back to their work.  The nurse-girl slapped one of her charges
and then began to push the perambulator up the hill.  Everyone had
unconcernedly taken up the thread at the very point where they had
dropped it.

I rushed downstairs, but the hall door was open, and I heard the voices
of my companions, loud in astonishment and congratulation, in the yard.
How we all shook hands and laughed as we came together, and how Mrs.
Challenger kissed us all in her emotion, before she finally threw herself
into the bear-hug of her husband.

"But they could not have been asleep!" cried Lord John.  "Dash it all,
Challenger, you don't mean to believe that those folk were asleep with
their staring eyes and stiff limbs and that awful death grin on their
faces!"

"It can only have been the condition that is called catalepsy," said
Challenger.  "It has been a rare phenomenon in the past and has
constantly been mistaken for death.  While it endures, the temperature
falls, the respiration disappears, the heartbeat is indistinguishable--in
fact, it _is_ death, save that it is evanescent.  Even the most
comprehensive mind"--here he closed his eyes and simpered--"could hardly
conceive a universal outbreak of it in this fashion."

"You may label it catalepsy," remarked Summerlee, "but, after all, that
is only a name, and we know as little of the result as we do of the
poison which has caused it.  The most we can say is that the vitiated
ether has produced a temporary death."

Austin was seated all in a heap on the step of the car.  It was his
coughing which I had heard from above.  He had been holding his head in
silence, but now he was muttering to himself and running his eyes over
the car.

"Young fat-head!" he grumbled.  "Can't leave things alone!"

"What's the matter, Austin?"

"Lubricators left running, sir.  Someone has been fooling with the car.
I expect it's that young garden boy, sir."

Lord John looked guilty.

"I don't know what's amiss with me," continued Austin, staggering to his
feet.  "I expect I came over queer when I was hosing her down.  I seem to
remember flopping over by the step.  But I'll swear I never left those
lubricator taps on."

In a condensed narrative the astonished Austin was told what had happened
to himself and the world.  The mystery of the dripping lubricators was
also explained to him.  He listened with an air of deep distrust when
told how an amateur had driven his car and with absorbed interest to the
few sentences in which our experiences of the sleeping city were
recorded.  I can remember his comment when the story was concluded.

"Was you outside the Bank of England, sir?"

"Yes, Austin."

"With all them millions inside and everybody asleep?"

"That was so."

"And I not there!" he groaned, and turned dismally once more to the
hosing of his car.

There was a sudden grinding of wheels upon gravel.  The old cab had
actually pulled up at Challenger's door.  I saw the young occupant step
out from it.  An instant later the maid, who looked as tousled and
bewildered as if she had that instant been aroused from the deepest
sleep, appeared with a card upon a tray.  Challenger snorted ferociously
as he looked at it, and his thick black hair seemed to bristle up in his
wrath.

"A pressman!" he growled.  Then with a deprecating smile:  "After all, it
is natural that the whole world should hasten to know what I think of
such an episode."

"That can hardly be his errand," said Summerlee, "for he was on the road
in his cab before ever the crisis came."

I looked at the card:  "James Baxter, London Correspondent, New York
Monitor."

"You'll see him?" said I.

"Not I."

"Oh, George!  You should be kinder and more considerate to others.
Surely you have learned something from what we have undergone."

He tut-tutted and shook his big, obstinate head.

"A poisonous breed!  Eh, Malone?  The worst weed in modern civilization,
the ready tool of the quack and the hindrance of the self-respecting man!
When did they ever say a good word for me?"

"When did you ever say a good word to them?" I answered.  "Come, sir,
this is a stranger who has made a journey to see you.  I am sure that you
won't be rude to him."

"Well, well," he grumbled, "you come with me and do the talking.  I
protest in advance against any such outrageous invasion of my private
life."  Muttering and mumbling, he came rolling after me like an angry
and rather ill-conditioned mastiff.

The dapper young American pulled out his notebook and plunged instantly
into his subject.

"I came down, sir," said he, "because our people in America would very
much like to hear more about this danger which is, in your opinion,
pressing upon the world."

"I know of no danger which is now pressing upon the world," Challenger
answered gruffly.

The pressman looked at him in mild surprise.

"I meant, sir, the chances that the world might run into a belt of
poisonous ether."

"I do not now apprehend any such danger," said Challenger.

The pressman looked even more perplexed.

"You are Professor Challenger, are you not?" he asked.

"Yes, sir; that is my name."

"I cannot understand, then, how you can say that there is no such danger.
I am alluding to your own letter, published above your name in the London
Times of this morning."

It was Challenger's turn to look surprised.

"This morning?" said he.  "No London Times was published this morning."

"Surely, sir," said the American in mild remonstrance, "you must admit
that the London Times is a daily paper."  He drew out a copy from his
inside pocket.  "Here is the letter to which I refer."

Challenger chuckled and rubbed his hands.

"I begin to understand," said he.  "So you read this letter this morning?"

"Yes, sir."

"And came at once to interview me?"

"Yes, sir."

"Did you observe anything unusual upon the journey down?"

"Well, to tell the truth, your people seemed more lively and generally
human than I have ever seen them.  The baggage man set out to tell me a
funny story, and that's a new experience for me in this country."

"Nothing else?"

"Why, no, sir, not that I can recall."

"Well, now, what hour did you leave Victoria?"

The American smiled.

"I came here to interview you, Professor, but it seems to be a case of
'Is this nigger fishing, or is this fish niggering?' You're doing most of
the work."

"It happens to interest me.  Do you recall the hour?"

"Sure.  It was half-past twelve."

"And you arrived?"

"At a quarter-past two."

"And you hired a cab?"

"That was so."

"How far do you suppose it is to the station?"

"Well, I should reckon the best part of two miles."

"So how long do you think it took you?"

"Well, half an hour, maybe, with that asthmatic in front."

"So it should be three o'clock?"

"Yes, or a trifle after it."

"Look at your watch."

The American did so and then stared at us in astonishment.

"Say!" he cried.  "It's run down.  That horse has broken every record,
sure.  The sun is pretty low, now that I come to look at it.  Well,
there's something here I don't understand."

"Have you no remembrance of anything remarkable as you came up the hill?"

"Well, I seem to recollect that I was mighty sleepy once.  It comes back
to me that I wanted to say something to the driver and that I couldn't
make him heed me.  I guess it was the heat, but I felt swimmy for a
moment.  That's all."

"So it is with the whole human race," said Challenger to me.  "They have
all felt swimmy for a moment.  None of them have as yet any comprehension
of what has occurred.  Each will go on with his interrupted job as Austin
has snatched up his hose-pipe or the golfer continued his game.  Your
editor, Malone, will continue the issue of his papers, and very much
amazed he will be at finding that an issue is missing.  Yes, my young
friend," he added to the American reporter, with a sudden mood of amused
geniality, "it may interest you to know that the world has swum through
the poisonous current which swirls like the Gulf Stream through the ocean
of ether.  You will also kindly note for your own future convenience that
to-day is not Friday, August the twenty-seventh, but Saturday, August the
twenty-eighth, and that you sat senseless in your cab for twenty-eight
hours upon the Rotherfield hill."

And "right here," as my American colleague would say, I may bring this
narrative to an end.  It is, as you are probably aware, only a fuller and
more detailed version of the account which appeared in the Monday edition
of the Daily Gazette--an account which has been universally admitted to
be the greatest journalistic scoop of all time, which sold no fewer than
three-and-a-half million copies of the paper.  Framed upon the wall of my
sanctum I retain those magnificent headlines:--


                TWENTY-EIGHT HOURS' WORLD COMA
                   UNPRECEDENTED EXPERIENCE
                     CHALLENGER JUSTIFIED
                   OUR CORRESPONDENT ESCAPES
                     ENTHRALLING NARRATIVE
                        THE OXYGEN ROOM
                       WEIRD MOTOR DRIVE
                          DEAD LONDON
                  REPLACING THE MISSING PAGE
                 GREAT FIRES AND LOSS OF LIFE
                        WILL IT RECUR?


Underneath this glorious scroll came nine and a half columns of
narrative, in which appeared the first, last, and only account of the
history of the planet, so far as one observer could draw it, during one
long day of its existence.  Challenger and Summerlee have treated the
matter in a joint scientific paper, but to me alone was left the popular
account.  Surely I can sing "Nunc dimittis."  What is left but
anti-climax in the life of a journalist after that!

But let me not end on sensational headlines and a merely personal
triumph.  Rather let me quote the sonorous passages in which the greatest
of daily papers ended its admirable leader upon the subject--a leader
which might well be filed for reference by every thoughtful man.

"It has been a well-worn truism," said the Times, "that our human race
are a feeble folk before the infinite latent forces which surround us.
From the prophets of old and from the philosophers of our own time the
same message and warning have reached us.  But, like all oft-repeated
truths, it has in time lost something of its actuality and cogency.  A
lesson, an actual experience, was needed to bring it home.  It is from
that salutory but terrible ordeal that we have just emerged, with minds
which are still stunned by the suddenness of the blow and with spirits
which are chastened by the realization of our own limitations and
impotence.  The world has paid a fearful price for its schooling.  Hardly
yet have we learned the full tale of disaster, but the destruction by
fire of New York, of Orleans, and of Brighton constitutes in itself one
of the greatest tragedies in the history of our race.  When the account
of the railway and shipping accidents has been completed, it will furnish
grim reading, although there is evidence to show that in the vast
majority of cases the drivers of trains and engineers of steamers
succeeded in shutting off their motive power before succumbing to the
poison.  But the material damage, enormous as it is both in life and in
property, is not the consideration which will be uppermost in our minds
to-day.  All this may in time be forgotten.  But what will not be
forgotten, and what will and should continue to obsess our imaginations,
is this revelation of the possibilities of the universe, this destruction
of our ignorant self-complacency, and this demonstration of how narrow is
the path of our material existence and what abysses may lie upon either
side of it.  Solemnity and humility are at the base of all our emotions
to-day.  May they be the foundations upon which a more earnest and
reverent race may build a more worthy temple."


ROUND THE RED LAMP

BEING FACTS AND FANCIES OF MEDICAL LIFE

By SIR ARTHUR CONAN DOYLE




THE PREFACE.

[Being an extract from a long and animated correspondence with a friend
in America.]

I quite recognise the force of your objection that an invalid or a
woman in weak health would get no good from stories which attempt to
treat some features of medical life with a certain amount of realism.
If you deal with this life at all, however, and if you are anxious to
make your doctors something more than marionettes, it is quite
essential that you should paint the darker side, since it is that which
is principally presented to the surgeon or physician.  He sees many
beautiful things, it is true, fortitude and heroism, love and
self-sacrifice; but they are all called forth (as our nobler qualities
are always called forth) by bitter sorrow and trial.  One cannot write
of medical life and be merry over it.

Then why write of it, you may ask?  If a subject is painful why treat
it at all?  I answer that it is the province of fiction to treat
painful things as well as cheerful ones.  The story which wiles away a
weary hour fulfils an obviously good purpose, but not more so, I hold,
than that which helps to emphasise the graver side of life.  A tale
which may startle the reader out of his usual grooves of thought, and
shocks him into seriousness, plays the part of the alterative and tonic
in medicine, bitter to the taste but bracing in the result.  There are
a few stories in this little collection which might have such an
effect, and I have so far shared in your feeling that I have reserved
them from serial publication.  In book-form the reader can see that
they are medical stories, and can, if he or she be so minded, avoid
them.

Yours very truly,

A. CONAN DOYLE.


P. S.--You ask about the Red Lamp.  It is the usual sign of the general
practitioner in England.




CONTENTS.

  BEHIND THE TIMES
  HIS FIRST OPERATION
  A STRAGGLER OF '15
  THE THIRD GENERATION
  A FALSE START
  THE CURSE OF EVE
  SWEETHEARTS
  A PHYSIOLOGIST'S WIFE
  THE CASE OF LADY SANNOX
  A QUESTION OF DIPLOMACY
  A MEDICAL DOCUMENT
  LOT NO. 249
  THE LOS AMIGOS FIASCO
  THE DOCTORS OF HOYLAND
  THE SURGEON TALKS




ROUND THE RED LAMP.




BEHIND THE TIMES.

My first interview with Dr. James Winter was under dramatic
circumstances.  It occurred at two in the morning in the bedroom of an
old country house.  I kicked him twice on the white waistcoat and
knocked off his gold spectacles, while he with the aid of a female
accomplice stifled my angry cries in a flannel petticoat and thrust me
into a warm bath.  I am told that one of my parents, who happened to be
present, remarked in a whisper that there was nothing the matter with
my lungs.  I cannot recall how Dr. Winter looked at the time, for I had
other things to think of, but his description of my own appearance is
far from flattering.  A fluffy head, a body like a trussed goose, very
bandy legs, and feet with the soles turned inwards--those are the main
items which he can remember.

From this time onwards the epochs of my life were the periodical
assaults which Dr. Winter made upon me.  He vaccinated me; he cut me
for an abscess; he blistered me for mumps.  It was a world of peace and
he the one dark cloud that threatened.  But at last there came a time
of real illness--a time when I lay for months together inside my
wickerwork-basket bed, and then it was that I learned that that hard
face could relax, that those country-made creaking boots could steal
very gently to a bedside, and that that rough voice could thin into a
whisper when it spoke to a sick child.

And now the child is himself a medical man, and yet Dr. Winter is the
same as ever.  I can see no change since first I can remember him, save
that perhaps the brindled hair is a trifle whiter, and the huge
shoulders a little more bowed.  He is a very tall man, though he loses
a couple of inches from his stoop.  That big back of his has curved
itself over sick beds until it has set in that shape.  His face is of a
walnut brown, and tells of long winter drives over bleak country roads,
with the wind and the rain in his teeth.  It looks smooth at a little
distance, but as you approach him you see that it is shot with
innumerable fine wrinkles like a last year's apple.  They are hardly to
be seen when he is in repose; but when he laughs his face breaks like a
starred glass, and you realise then that though he looks old, he must
be older than he looks.


How old that is I could never discover.  I have often tried to find
out, and have struck his stream as high up as George IV and even the
Regency, but without ever getting quite to the source.  His mind must
have been open to impressions very early, but it must also have closed
early, for the politics of the day have little interest for him, while
he is fiercely excited about questions which are entirely prehistoric.
He shakes his head when he speaks of the first Reform Bill and
expresses grave doubts as to its wisdom, and I have heard him, when he
was warmed by a glass of wine, say bitter things about Robert Peel and
his abandoning of the Corn Laws.  The death of that statesman brought
the history of England to a definite close, and Dr. Winter refers to
everything which had happened since then as to an insignificant
anticlimax.

But it was only when I had myself become a medical man that I was able
to appreciate how entirely he is a survival of a past generation.  He
had learned his medicine under that obsolete and forgotten system by
which a youth was apprenticed to a surgeon, in the days when the study
of anatomy was often approached through a violated grave.  His views
upon his own profession are even more reactionary than in politics.
Fifty years have brought him little and deprived him of less.
Vaccination was well within the teaching of his youth, though I think
he has a secret preference for inoculation.  Bleeding he would practise
freely but for public opinion.  Chloroform he regards as a dangerous
innovation, and he always clicks with his tongue when it is mentioned.
He has even been known to say vain things about Laennec, and to refer
to the stethoscope as "a new-fangled French toy."  He carries one in
his hat out of deference to the expectations of his patients, but he is
very hard of hearing, so that it makes little difference whether he
uses it or not.

He reads, as a duty, his weekly medical paper, so that he has a general
idea as to the advance of modern science.  He always persists in
looking upon it as a huge and rather ludicrous experiment.  The germ
theory of disease set him chuckling for a long time, and his favourite
joke in the sick room was to say, "Shut the door or the germs will be
getting in." As to the Darwinian theory, it struck him as being the
crowning joke of the century.  "The children in the nursery and the
ancestors in the stable," he would cry, and laugh the tears out of his
eyes.

He is so very much behind the day that occasionally, as things move
round in their usual circle, he finds himself, to his bewilderment, in
the front of the fashion.  Dietetic treatment, for example, had been
much in vogue in his youth, and he has more practical knowledge of it
than any one whom I have met.  Massage, too, was familiar to him when
it was new to our generation.  He had been trained also at a time when
instruments were in a rudimentary state, and when men learned to trust
more to their own fingers.  He has a model surgical hand, muscular in
the palm, tapering in the fingers, "with an eye at the end of each."  I
shall not easily forget how Dr. Patterson and I cut Sir John Sirwell,
the County Member, and were unable to find the stone.  It was a
horrible moment.  Both our careers were at stake.  And then it was that
Dr. Winter, whom we had asked out of courtesy to be present, introduced
into the wound a finger which seemed to our excited senses to be about
nine inches long, and hooked out the stone at the end of it.  "It's
always well to bring one in your waistcoat-pocket," said he with a
chuckle, "but I suppose you youngsters are above all that."

We made him president of our branch of the British Medical Association,
but he resigned after the first meeting.  "The young men are too much
for me," he said.  "I don't understand what they are talking about."
Yet his patients do very well.  He has the healing touch--that magnetic
thing which defies explanation or analysis, but which is a very evident
fact none the less.  His mere presence leaves the patient with more
hopefulness and vitality.  The sight of disease affects him as dust
does a careful housewife.  It makes him angry and impatient.  "Tut,
tut, this will never do!" he cries, as he takes over a new case.  He
would shoo Death out of the room as though he were an intrusive hen.
But when the intruder refuses to be dislodged, when the blood moves
more slowly and the eyes grow dimmer, then it is that Dr. Winter is of
more avail than all the drugs in his surgery.  Dying folk cling to his
hand as if the presence of his bulk and vigour gives them more courage
to face the change; and that kindly, windbeaten face has been the last
earthly impression which many a sufferer has carried into the unknown.

When Dr. Patterson and I--both of us young, energetic, and
up-to-date--settled in the district, we were most cordially received by
the old doctor, who would have been only too happy to be relieved of
some of his patients.  The patients themselves, however, followed their
own inclinations--which is a reprehensible way that patients have--so
that we remained neglected, with our modern instruments and our latest
alkaloids, while he was serving out senna and calomel to all the
countryside.  We both of us loved the old fellow, but at the same time,
in the privacy of our own intimate conversations, we could not help
commenting upon this deplorable lack of judgment.  "It's all very well
for the poorer people," said Patterson.  "But after all the educated
classes have a right to expect that their medical man will know the
difference between a mitral murmur and a bronchitic rale.  It's the
judicial frame of mind, not the sympathetic, which is the essential
one."

I thoroughly agreed with Patterson in what he said.  It happened,
however, that very shortly afterwards the epidemic of influenza broke
out, and we were all worked to death.  One morning I met Patterson on
my round, and found him looking rather pale and fagged out.  He made
the same remark about me.  I was, in fact, feeling far from well, and I
lay upon the sofa all the afternoon with a splitting headache and pains
in every joint.  As evening closed in, I could no longer disguise the
fact that the scourge was upon me, and I felt that I should have
medical advice without delay.  It was of Patterson, naturally, that I
thought, but somehow the idea of him had suddenly become repugnant to
me.  I thought of his cold, critical attitude, of his endless
questions, of his tests and his tappings.  I wanted something more
soothing--something more genial.

"Mrs. Hudson," said I to my housekeeper, "would you kindly run along to
old Dr. Winter and tell him that I should be obliged to him if he would
step round?"

She was back with an answer presently.  "Dr. Winter will come round in
an hour or so, sir; but he has just been called in to attend Dr.
Patterson."




HIS FIRST OPERATION.

It was the first day of the winter session, and the third year's man
was walking with the first year's man.  Twelve o'clock was just booming
out from the Tron Church.

"Let me see," said the third year's man.  "You have never seen an
operation?"

"Never."

"Then this way, please.  This is Rutherford's historic bar.  A glass of
sherry, please, for this gentleman.  You are rather sensitive, are you
not?"

"My nerves are not very strong, I am afraid."

"Hum!  Another glass of sherry for this gentleman.  We are going to an
operation now, you know."

The novice squared his shoulders and made a gallant attempt to look
unconcerned.

"Nothing very bad--eh?"

"Well, yes--pretty bad."

"An--an amputation?"

"No; it's a bigger affair than that."

"I think--I think they must be expecting me at home."

"There's no sense in funking.  If you don't go to-day, you must
to-morrow.  Better get it over at once.  Feel pretty fit?"

"Oh, yes; all right!"  The smile was not a success.

"One more glass of sherry, then.  Now come on or we shall be late.  I
want you to be well in front."

"Surely that is not necessary."

"Oh, it is far better!  What a drove of students!  There are plenty of
new men among them.  You can tell them easily enough, can't you? If
they were going down to be operated upon themselves, they could not
look whiter."

"I don't think I should look as white."

"Well, I was just the same myself.  But the feeling soon wears off.
You see a fellow with a face like plaster, and before the week is out
he is eating his lunch in the dissecting rooms.  I'll tell you all
about the case when we get to the theatre."

The students were pouring down the sloping street which led to the
infirmary--each with his little sheaf of note-books in his hand.  There
were pale, frightened lads, fresh from the high schools, and callous
old chronics, whose generation had passed on and left them.  They swept
in an unbroken, tumultuous stream from the university gate to the
hospital.  The figures and gait of the men were young, but there was
little youth in most of their faces.  Some looked as if they ate too
little--a few as if they drank too much.  Tall and short, tweed-coated
and black, round-shouldered, bespectacled, and slim, they crowded with
clatter of feet and rattle of sticks through the hospital gate.  Now
and again they thickened into two lines, as the carriage of a surgeon
of the staff rolled over the cobblestones between.

"There's going to be a crowd at Archer's," whispered the senior man
with suppressed excitement.  "It is grand to see him at work.  I've
seen him jab all round the aorta until it made me jumpy to watch him.
This way, and mind the whitewash."

They passed under an archway and down a long, stone-flagged corridor,
with drab-coloured doors on either side, each marked with a number.
Some of them were ajar, and the novice glanced into them with tingling
nerves.  He was reassured to catch a glimpse of cheery fires, lines of
white-counterpaned beds, and a profusion of coloured texts upon the
wall.  The corridor opened upon a small hall, with a fringe of poorly
clad people seated all round upon benches.  A young man, with a pair of
scissors stuck like a flower in his buttonhole and a note-book in his
hand, was passing from one to the other, whispering and writing.

"Anything good?" asked the third year's man.

"You should have been here yesterday," said the out-patient clerk,
glancing up.  "We had a regular field day.  A popliteal aneurism, a
Colles' fracture, a spina bifida, a tropical abscess, and an
elephantiasis.  How's that for a single haul?"

"I'm sorry I missed it.  But they'll come again, I suppose.  What's up
with the old gentleman?"

A broken workman was sitting in the shadow, rocking himself slowly to
and fro, and groaning.  A woman beside him was trying to console him,
patting his shoulder with a hand which was spotted over with curious
little white blisters.

"It's a fine carbuncle," said the clerk, with the air of a connoisseur
who describes his orchids to one who can appreciate them.  "It's on his
back and the passage is draughty, so we must not look at it, must we,
daddy?  Pemphigus," he added carelessly, pointing to the woman's
disfigured hands.  "Would you care to stop and take out a metacarpal?"

"No, thank you.  We are due at Archer's.  Come on!" and they rejoined
the throng which was hurrying to the theatre of the famous surgeon.

The tiers of horseshoe benches rising from the floor to the ceiling
were already packed, and the novice as he entered saw vague curving
lines of faces in front of him, and heard the deep buzz of a hundred
voices, and sounds of laughter from somewhere up above him.  His
companion spied an opening on the second bench, and they both squeezed
into it.

"This is grand!" the senior man whispered.  "You'll have a rare view of
it all."

Only a single row of heads intervened between them and the operating
table.  It was of unpainted deal, plain, strong, and scrupulously
clean.  A sheet of brown water-proofing covered half of it, and beneath
stood a large tin tray full of sawdust.  On the further side, in front
of the window, there was a board which was strewed with glittering
instruments--forceps, tenacula, saws, canulas, and trocars.  A line of
knives, with long, thin, delicate blades, lay at one side.  Two young
men lounged in front of this, one threading needles, the other doing
something to a brass coffee-pot-like thing which hissed out puffs of
steam.

"That's Peterson," whispered the senior, "the big, bald man in the
front row.  He's the skin-grafting man, you know.  And that's Anthony
Browne, who took a larynx out successfully last winter.  And there's
Murphy, the pathologist, and Stoddart, the eye-man.  You'll come to
know them all soon."

"Who are the two men at the table?"

"Nobody--dressers.  One has charge of the instruments and the other of
the puffing Billy.  It's Lister's antiseptic spray, you know, and
Archer's one of the carbolic-acid men.  Hayes is the leader of the
cleanliness-and-cold-water school, and they all hate each other like
poison."

A flutter of interest passed through the closely packed benches as a
woman in petticoat and bodice was led in by two nurses.  A red woolen
shawl was draped over her head and round her neck.  The face which
looked out from it was that of a woman in the prime of her years, but
drawn with suffering, and of a peculiar beeswax tint.  Her head drooped
as she walked, and one of the nurses, with her arm round her waist, was
whispering consolation in her ear.  She gave a quick side-glance at the
instrument table as she passed, but the nurses turned her away from it.

"What ails her?" asked the novice.

"Cancer of the parotid.  It's the devil of a case; extends right away
back behind the carotids.  There's hardly a man but Archer would dare
to follow it.  Ah, here he is himself!"

As he spoke, a small, brisk, iron-grey man came striding into the room,
rubbing his hands together as he walked.  He had a clean-shaven face,
of the naval officer type, with large, bright eyes, and a firm,
straight mouth.  Behind him came his big house-surgeon, with his
gleaming pince-nez, and a trail of dressers, who grouped themselves
into the corners of the room.

"Gentlemen," cried the surgeon in a voice as hard and brisk as his
manner, "we have here an interesting case of tumour of the parotid,
originally cartilaginous but now assuming malignant characteristics,
and therefore requiring excision.  On to the table, nurse!  Thank you!
Chloroform, clerk!  Thank you!  You can take the shawl off, nurse."

The woman lay back upon the water-proofed pillow, and her murderous
tumour lay revealed.  In itself it was a pretty thing--ivory white,
with a mesh of blue veins, and curving gently from jaw to chest.  But
the lean, yellow face and the stringy throat were in horrible contrast
with the plumpness and sleekness of this monstrous growth.  The surgeon
placed a hand on each side of it and pressed it slowly backwards and
forwards.

"Adherent at one place, gentlemen," he cried.  "The growth involves the
carotids and jugulars, and passes behind the ramus of the jaw, whither
we must be prepared to follow it.  It is impossible to say how deep our
dissection may carry us.  Carbolic tray.  Thank you!  Dressings of
carbolic gauze, if you please!  Push the chloroform, Mr. Johnson.  Have
the small saw ready in case it is necessary to remove the jaw."

The patient was moaning gently under the towel which had been placed
over her face.  She tried to raise her arms and to draw up her knees,
but two dressers restrained her.  The heavy air was full of the
penetrating smells of carbolic acid and of chloroform.  A muffled cry
came from under the towel, and then a snatch of a song, sung in a high,
quavering, monotonous voice:

  "He says, says he,
  If you fly with me
  You'll be mistress of the ice-cream van.
  You'll be mistress of the----"

It mumbled off into a drone and stopped.  The surgeon came across,
still rubbing his hands, and spoke to an elderly man in front of the
novice.

"Narrow squeak for the Government," he said.

"Oh, ten is enough."

"They won't have ten long.  They'd do better to resign before they are
driven to it."

"Oh, I should fight it out."

"What's the use.  They can't get past the committee even if they got a
vote in the House.  I was talking to----"

"Patient's ready, sir," said the dresser.

"Talking to McDonald--but I'll tell you about it presently."  He walked
back to the patient, who was breathing in long, heavy gasps.  "I
propose," said he, passing his hand over the tumour in an almost
caressing fashion, "to make a free incision over the posterior border,
and to take another forward at right angles to the lower end of it.
Might I trouble you for a medium knife, Mr. Johnson?"

The novice, with eyes which were dilating with horror, saw the surgeon
pick up the long, gleaming knife, dip it into a tin basin, and balance
it in his fingers as an artist might his brush.  Then he saw him pinch
up the skin above the tumour with his left hand.  At the sight his
nerves, which had already been tried once or twice that day, gave way
utterly.  His head swain round, and he felt that in another instant he
might faint.  He dared not look at the patient.  He dug his thumbs into
his ears lest some scream should come to haunt him, and he fixed his
eyes rigidly upon the wooden ledge in front of him.  One glance, one
cry, would, he knew, break down the shred of self-possession which he
still retained.  He tried to think of cricket, of green fields and
rippling water, of his sisters at home--of anything rather than of what
was going on so near him.

And yet somehow, even with his ears stopped up, sounds seemed to
penetrate to him and to carry their own tale.  He heard, or thought
that he heard, the long hissing of the carbolic engine.  Then he was
conscious of some movement among the dressers.  Were there groans, too,
breaking in upon him, and some other sound, some fluid sound, which was
more dreadfully suggestive still?  His mind would keep building up
every step of the operation, and fancy made it more ghastly than fact
could have been.  His nerves tingled and quivered.  Minute by minute
the giddiness grew more marked, the numb, sickly feeling at his heart
more distressing.  And then suddenly, with a groan, his head pitching
forward, and his brow cracking sharply upon the narrow wooden shelf in
front of him, he lay in a dead faint.


When he came to himself, he was lying in the empty theatre, with his
collar and shirt undone.  The third year's man was dabbing a wet sponge
over his face, and a couple of grinning dressers were looking on.

"All right," cried the novice, sitting up and rubbing his eyes.  "I'm
sorry to have made an ass of myself."

"Well, so I should think," said his companion.

"What on earth did you faint about?"

"I couldn't help it.  It was that operation."

"What operation?"

"Why, that cancer."

There was a pause, and then the three students burst out laughing.
"Why, you juggins!" cried the senior man, "there never was an operation
at all!  They found the patient didn't stand the chloroform well, and
so the whole thing was off.  Archer has been giving us one of his racy
lectures, and you fainted just in the middle of his favourite story."




A STRAGGLER OF '15.

It was a dull October morning, and heavy, rolling fog-wreaths lay low
over the wet grey roofs of the Woolwich houses.  Down in the long,
brick-lined streets all was sodden and greasy and cheerless.  From the
high dark buildings of the arsenal came the whirr of many wheels, the
thudding of weights, and the buzz and babel of human toil.  Beyond, the
dwellings of the workingmen, smoke-stained and unlovely, radiated away
in a lessening perspective of narrowing road and dwindling wall.

There were few folk in the streets, for the toilers had all been
absorbed since break of day by the huge smoke-spouting monster, which
sucked in the manhood of the town, to belch it forth weary and
work-stained every night.  Little groups of children straggled to
school, or loitered to peep through the single, front windows at the
big, gilt-edged Bibles, balanced upon small, three-legged tables, which
were their usual adornment.  Stout women, with thick, red arms and
dirty aprons, stood upon the whitened doorsteps, leaning upon their
brooms, and shrieking their morning greetings across the road.  One
stouter, redder, and dirtier than the rest, had gathered a small knot
of cronies around her and was talking energetically, with little shrill
titters from her audience to punctuate her remarks.

"Old enough to know better!" she cried, in answer to an exclamation
from one of the listeners.  "If he hain't no sense now, I 'specs he
won't learn much on this side o' Jordan.  Why, 'ow old is he at all?
Blessed if I could ever make out."

"Well, it ain't so hard to reckon," said a sharp-featured pale-faced
woman with watery blue eyes.  "He's been at the battle o' Waterloo, and
has the pension and medal to prove it."

"That were a ter'ble long time agone," remarked a third.  "It were
afore I were born."

"It were fifteen year after the beginnin' of the century," cried a
younger woman, who had stood leaning against the wall, with a smile of
superior knowledge upon her face.  "My Bill was a-saying so last
Sabbath, when I spoke to him o' old Daddy Brewster, here."

"And suppose he spoke truth, Missus Simpson, 'ow long agone do that
make it?"

"It's eighty-one now," said the original speaker, checking off the
years upon her coarse red fingers, "and that were fifteen.  Ten and
ten, and ten, and ten, and ten--why, it's only sixty-and-six year, so
he ain't so old after all."

"But he weren't a newborn babe at the battle, silly!" cried the young
woman with a chuckle.  "S'pose he were only twenty, then he couldn't be
less than six-and-eighty now, at the lowest."

"Aye, he's that--every day of it," cried several.

"I've had 'bout enough of it," remarked the large woman gloomily.
"Unless his young niece, or grandniece, or whatever she is, come
to-day, I'm off, and he can find some one else to do his work.  Your
own 'ome first, says I."

"Ain't he quiet, then, Missus Simpson?" asked the youngest of the group.

"Listen to him now," she answered, with her hand half raised and her
head turned slantwise towards the open door.  From the upper floor
there came a shuffling, sliding sound with a sharp tapping of a stick.
"There he go back and forrards, doing what he call his sentry go.  'Arf
the night through he's at that game, the silly old juggins.  At six
o'clock this very mornin there he was beatin' with a stick at my door.
'Turn out, guard!' he cried, and a lot more jargon that I could make
nothing of.  Then what with his coughin' and 'awkin' and spittin',
there ain't no gettin' a wink o' sleep.  Hark to him now!"

"Missus Simpson, Missus Simpson!" cried a cracked and querulous voice
from above.

"That's him!" she cried, nodding her head with an air of triumph.  "He
do go on somethin' scandalous.  Yes, Mr. Brewster, sir."

"I want my morning ration, Missus Simpson."

"It's just ready, Mr. Brewster, sir."

"Blessed if he ain't like a baby cryin' for its pap," said the young
woman.

"I feel as if I could shake his old bones up sometimes!" cried Mrs.
Simpson viciously.  "But who's for a 'arf of fourpenny?"

The whole company were about to shuffle off to the public house, when a
young girl stepped across the road and touched the housekeeper timidly
upon the arm.  "I think that is No. 56 Arsenal View," she said.  "Can
you tell me if Mr. Brewster lives here?"

The housekeeper looked critically at the newcomer.  She was a girl of
about twenty, broad-faced and comely, with a turned-up nose and large,
honest grey eyes.  Her print dress, her straw hat, with its bunch of
glaring poppies, and the bundle she carried, had all a smack of the
country.

"You're Norah Brewster, I s'pose," said Mrs. Simpson, eyeing her up and
down with no friendly gaze.

"Yes, I've come to look after my Granduncle Gregory."

"And a good job too," cried the housekeeper, with a toss of her head.
"It's about time that some of his own folk took a turn at it, for I've
had enough of it.  There you are, young woman!  In you go and make
yourself at home.  There's tea in the caddy and bacon on the dresser,
and the old man will be about you if you don't fetch him his breakfast.
I'll send for my things in the evenin'."  With a nod she strolled off
with her attendant gossips in the direction of the public house.

Thus left to her own devices, the country girl walked into the front
room and took off her hat and jacket.  It was a low-roofed apartment
with a sputtering fire upon which a small brass kettle was singing
cheerily.  A stained cloth lay over half the table, with an empty brown
teapot, a loaf of bread, and some coarse crockery.  Norah Brewster
looked rapidly about her, and in an instant took over her new duties.
Ere five minutes had passed the tea was made, two slices of bacon were
frizzling on the pan, the table was rearranged, the antimacassars
straightened over the sombre brown furniture, and the whole room had
taken a new air of comfort and neatness.  This done she looked round
curiously at the prints upon the walls.  Over the fireplace, in a
small, square case, a brown medal caught her eye, hanging from a strip
of purple ribbon.  Beneath was a slip of newspaper cutting.  She stood
on her tiptoes, with her fingers on the edge of the mantelpiece, and
craned her neck up to see it, glancing down from time to time at the
bacon which simmered and hissed beneath her.  The cutting was yellow
with age, and ran in this way:

"On Tuesday an interesting ceremony was performed at the barracks of
the Third Regiment of Guards, when, in the presence of the Prince
Regent, Lord Hill, Lord Saltoun, and an assemblage which comprised
beauty as well as valour, a special medal was presented to Corporal
Gregory Brewster, of Captain Haldane's flank company, in recognition of
his gallantry in the recent great battle in the Lowlands.  It appears
that on the ever-memorable 18th of June four companies of the Third
Guards and of the Coldstreams, under the command of Colonels Maitland
and Byng, held the important farmhouse of Hougoumont at the right of
the British position.  At a critical point of the action these troops
found themselves short of powder.  Seeing that Generals Foy and Jerome
Buonaparte were again massing their infantry for an attack on the
position, Colonel Byng dispatched Corporal Brewster to the rear to
hasten up the reserve ammunition.  Brewster came upon two powder
tumbrils of the Nassau division, and succeeded, after menacing the
drivers with his musket, in inducing them to convey their powder to
Hougoumont.  In his absence, however, the hedges surrounding the
position had been set on fire by a howitzer battery of the French, and
the passage of the carts full of powder became a most hazardous matter.
The first tumbril exploded, blowing the driver to fragments.  Daunted
by the fate of his comrade, the second driver turned his horses, but
Corporal Brewster, springing upon his seat, hurled the man down, and
urging the powder cart through the flames, succeeded in forcing his way
to his companions.  To this gallant deed may be directly attributed the
success of the British arms, for without powder it would have been
impossible to have held Hougoumont, and the Duke of Wellington had
repeatedly declared that had Hougoumont fallen, as well as La Haye
Sainte, he would have found it impossible to have held his ground.
Long may the heroic Brewster live to treasure the medal which he has so
bravely won, and to look back with pride to the day when, in the
presence of his comrades, he received this tribute to his valour from
the august hands of the first gentleman of the realm."

The reading of this old cutting increased in the girl's mind the
veneration which she had always had for her warrior kinsman.  From her
infancy he had been her hero, and she remembered how her father used to
speak of his courage and his strength, how he could strike down a
bullock with a blow of his fist and carry a fat sheep under either arm.
True, she had never seen him, but a rude painting at home which
depicted a square-faced, clean shaven, stalwart man with a great
bearskin cap, rose ever before her memory when she thought of him.

She was still gazing at the brown medal and wondering what the "Dulce
et decorum est" might mean, which was inscribed upon the edge, when
there came a sudden tapping and shuffling upon the stair, and there at
the door was standing the very man who had been so often in her
thoughts.

But could this indeed be he?  Where was the martial air, the flashing
eye, the warrior face which she had pictured?  There, framed in the
doorway, was a huge twisted old man, gaunt and puckered, with twitching
hands and shuffling, purposeless feet.  A cloud of fluffy white hair, a
red-veined nose, two thick tufts of eyebrow and a pair of dimly
questioning, watery blue eyes--these were what met her gaze.  He leaned
forward upon a stick, while his shoulders rose and fell with his
crackling, rasping breathing.

"I want my morning rations," he crooned, as he stumped forward to his
chair.  "The cold nips me without 'em.  See to my fingers!"  He held
out his distorted hands, all blue at the tips, wrinkled and gnarled,
with huge, projecting knuckles.

"It's nigh ready," answered the girl, gazing at him with wonder in her
eyes.  "Don't you know who I am, granduncle?  I am Norah Brewster from
Witham."

"Rum is warm," mumbled the old man, rocking to and fro in his chair,
"and schnapps is warm, and there's 'eat in soup, but it's a dish o' tea
for me.  What did you say your name was?"

"Norah Brewster."

"You can speak out, lass.  Seems to me folk's voices isn't as loud as
they used."

"I'm Norah Brewster, uncle.  I'm your grandniece come down from Essex
way to live with you."

"You'll be brother Jarge's girl!  Lor, to think o' little Jarge having
a girl!"  He chuckled hoarsely to himself, and the long, stringy sinews
of his throat jerked and quivered.

"I am the daughter of your brother George's son," said she, as she
turned the bacon.

"Lor, but little Jarge was a rare un!" he continued.  "Eh, by Jimini,
there was no chousing Jarge.  He's got a bull pup o' mine that I gave
him when I took the bounty.  You've heard him speak of it, likely?"

"Why, grandpa George has been dead this twenty year," said she, pouring
out the tea.

"Well, it was a bootiful pup--aye, a well-bred un, by Jimini!  I'm cold
for lack o' my rations.  Rum is good, and so is schnapps, but I'd as
lief have tea as either."

He breathed heavily while he devoured his food.  "It's a middlin'
goodish way you've come," said he at last.  "Likely the stage left
yesternight."

"The what, uncle?"

"The coach that brought you."

"Nay, I came by the mornin' train."

"Lor, now, think o' that!  You ain't afeard o' those newfangled things!
By Jimini, to think of you comin' by railroad like that!  What's the
world a-comin' to!"

There was silence for some minutes while Norah sat stirring her tea and
glancing sideways at the bluish lips and champing jaws of her companion.

"You must have seen a deal o' life, uncle," said she.  "It must seem a
long, long time to you!"

"Not so very long neither.  I'm ninety, come Candlemas; but it don't
seem long since I took the bounty.  And that battle, it might have been
yesterday.  Eh, but I get a power o' good from my rations!"  He did
indeed look less worn and colourless than when she first saw him.  His
face was flushed and his back more erect.

"Have you read that?" he asked, jerking his head towards the cutting.

"Yes, uncle, and I'm sure you must be proud of it."

"Ah, it was a great day for me!  A great day!  The Regent was there,
and a fine body of a man too!  'The ridgment is proud of you,' says he.
'And I'm proud of the ridgment,' say I.  'A damned good answer too!'
says he to Lord Hill, and they both bu'st out a-laughin'.  But what be
you a-peepin' out o' the window for?"

"Oh, uncle, here's a regiment of soldiers coming down the street with
the band playing in front of them."

"A ridgment, eh?  Where be my glasses?  Lor, but I can hear the band,
as plain as plain!  Here's the pioneers an' the drum-major!  What be
their number, lass?"  His eyes were shining and his bony yellow
fingers, like the claws of some fierce old bird, dug into her shoulder.

"They don't seem to have no number, uncle.  They've something wrote on
their shoulders.  Oxfordshire, I think it be."

"Ah, yes!" he growled.  "I heard as they'd dropped the numbers and
given them newfangled names.  There they go, by Jimini!  They're young
mostly, but they hain't forgot how to march.  They have the swing-aye,
I'll say that for them.  They've got the swing."  He gazed after them
until the last files had turned the corner and the measured tramp of
their marching had died away in the distance.

He had just regained his chair when the door opened and a gentleman
stepped in.

"Ah, Mr. Brewster!  Better to-day?" he asked.

"Come in, doctor!  Yes, I'm better.  But there's a deal o' bubbling in
my chest.  It's all them toobes.  If I could but cut the phlegm, I'd be
right.  Can't you give me something to cut the phlegm?"

The doctor, a grave-faced young man, put his fingers to the furrowed,
blue-corded wrist.

"You must be careful," he said.  "You must take no liberties."  The
thin tide of life seemed to thrill rather than to throb under his
finger.

The old man chuckled.

"I've got brother Jarge's girl to look after me now.  She'll see I
don't break barracks or do what I hadn't ought to.  Why, darn my skin,
I knew something was amiss!

"With what?"

"Why, with them soldiers.  You saw them pass, doctor--eh?  They'd
forgot their stocks.  Not one on 'em had his stock on."  He croaked and
chuckled for a long time over his discovery.  "It wouldn't ha' done for
the Dook!" he muttered.  "No, by Jimini! the Dook would ha' had a word
there."

The doctor smiled.  "Well, you are doing very well," said he.  "I'll
look in once a week or so, and see how you are."  As Norah followed him
to the door, he beckoned her outside.

"He is very weak," he whispered.  "If you find him failing you must
send for me."

"What ails him, doctor?"

"Ninety years ails him.  His arteries are pipes of lime.  His heart is
shrunken and flabby.  The man is worn out."

Norah stood watching the brisk figure of the young doctor, and
pondering over these new responsibilities which had come upon her.
When she turned a tall, brown-faced artilleryman, with the three gold
chevrons of sergeant upon his arm, was standing, carbine in hand, at
her elbow.

"Good-morning, miss," said he, raising one thick finger to his jaunty,
yellow-banded cap.  "I b'lieve there's an old gentleman lives here of
the name of Brewster, who was engaged in the battle o' Waterloo?"

"It's my granduncle, sir," said Norah, casting down her eyes before the
keen, critical gaze of the young soldier.  "He is in the front parlour."

"Could I have a word with him, miss?  I'll call again if it don't
chance to be convenient."

"I am sure that he would be very glad to see you, sir.  He's in here,
if you'll step in.  Uncle, here's a gentleman who wants to speak with
you."

"Proud to see you, sir--proud and glad, sir," cried the sergeant,
taking three steps forward into the room, and grounding his carbine
while he raised his hand, palm forwards, in a salute.  Norah stood by
the door, with her mouth and eyes open, wondering if her granduncle had
ever, in his prime, looked like this magnificent creature, and whether
he, in his turn, would ever come to resemble her granduncle.

The old man blinked up at his visitor, and shook his head slowly.  "Sit
ye down, sergeant," said he, pointing with his stick to a chair.
"You're full young for the stripes.  Lordy, it's easier to get three
now than one in my day.  Gunners were old soldiers then and the grey
hairs came quicker than the three stripes."

"I am eight years' service, sir," cried the sergeant.  "Macdonald is my
name--Sergeant Macdonald, of H Battery, Southern Artillery Division.  I
have called as the spokesman of my mates at the gunner's barracks to
say that we are proud to have you in the town, sir."

Old Brewster chuckled and rubbed his bony hands.  "That were what the
Regent said," he cried.  "'The ridgment is proud of ye,' says he.  'And
I am proud of the ridgment,' says I.  'And a damned good answer too,'
says he, and he and Lord Hill bu'st out a-laughin'."

"The non-commissioned mess would be proud and honoured to see you,
sir," said Sergeant Macdonald; "and if you could step as far you'll
always find a pipe o' baccy and a glass o' grog a-waitin' you."

The old man laughed until he coughed.  "Like to see me, would they?
The dogs!" said he.  "Well, well, when the warm weather comes again
I'll maybe drop in.  Too grand for a canteen, eh?  Got your mess just
the same as the orficers.  What's the world a-comin' to at all!"

"You was in the line, sir, was you not?" asked the sergeant
respectfully.

"The line?" cried the old man, with shrill scorn.  "Never wore a shako
in my life.  I am a guardsman, I am.  Served in the Third Guards--the
same they call now the Scots Guards.  Lordy, but they have all marched
away--every man of them--from old Colonel Byng down to the drummer
boys, and here am I a straggler--that's what I am, sergeant, a
straggler!  I'm here when I ought to be there.  But it ain't my fault
neither, for I'm ready to fall in when the word comes."

"We've all got to muster there," answered the sergeant.  "Won't you try
my baccy, sir?" handing over a sealskin pouch.

Old Brewster drew a blackened clay pipe from his pocket, and began to
stuff the tobacco into the bowl.  In an instant it slipped through his
fingers, and was broken to pieces on the floor.  His lip quivered, his
nose puckered up, and he began crying with the long, helpless sobs of a
child.  "I've broke my pipe," he cried.

"Don't, uncle; oh, don't!" cried Norah, bending over him, and patting
his white head as one soothes a baby.  "It don't matter.  We can easy
get another."

"Don't you fret yourself, sir," said the sergeant.  "'Ere's a wooden
pipe with an amber mouth, if you'll do me the honour to accept it from
me.  I'd be real glad if you will take it."

"Jimini!" cried he, his smiles breaking in an instant through his
tears.  "It's a fine pipe.  See to my new pipe, Norah.  I lay that
Jarge never had a pipe like that.  You've got your firelock there,
sergeant?"

"Yes, sir.  I was on my way back from the butts when I looked in."

"Let me have the feel of it.  Lordy, but it seems like old times to
have one's hand on a musket.  What's the manual, sergeant, eh?  Cock
your firelock--look to your priming--present your firelock--eh,
sergeant?  Oh, Jimini, I've broke your musket in halves!"

"That's all right, sir," cried the gunner laughing.  "You pressed on
the lever and opened the breech-piece.  That's where we load 'em, you
know."

"Load 'em at the wrong end!  Well, well, to think o' that!  And no
ramrod neither!  I've heard tell of it, but I never believed it afore.
Ah!  it won't come up to brown Bess.  When there's work to be done, you
mark my word and see if they don't come back to brown Bess."

"By the Lord, sir!" cried the sergeant hotly, "they need some change
out in South Africa now.  I see by this mornin's paper that the
Government has knuckled under to these Boers.  They're hot about it at
the non-com. mess, I can tell you, sir."

"Eh--eh," croaked old Brewster.  "By Jimini! it wouldn't ha' done for
the Dook; the Dook would ha' had a word to say over that."

"Ah, that he would, sir!" cried the sergeant; "and God send us another
like him.  But I've wearied you enough for one sitting.  I'll look in
again, and I'll bring a comrade or two with me, if I may, for there
isn't one but would be proud to have speech with you."

So, with another salute to the veteran and a gleam of white teeth at
Norah, the big gunner withdrew, leaving a memory of blue cloth and of
gold braid behind him.  Many days had not passed, however, before he
was back again, and during all the long winter he was a frequent
visitor at Arsenal View.  There came a time, at last, when it might be
doubted to which of the two occupants his visits were directed, nor was
it hard to say by which he was most anxiously awaited.  He brought
others with him; and soon, through all the lines, a pilgrimage to Daddy
Brewster's came to be looked upon as the proper thing to do.  Gunners
and sappers, linesmen and dragoons, came bowing and bobbing into the
little parlour, with clatter of side arms and clink of spurs,
stretching their long legs across the patchwork rug, and hunting in the
front of their tunics for the screw of tobacco or paper of snuff which
they had brought as a sign of their esteem.

It was a deadly cold winter, with six weeks on end of snow on the
ground, and Norah had a hard task to keep the life in that time-worn
body.  There were times when his mind would leave him, and when, save
an animal outcry when the hour of his meals came round, no word would
fall from him.  He was a white-haired child, with all a child's
troubles and emotions.  As the warm weather came once more, however,
and the green buds peeped forth again upon the trees, the blood thawed
in his veins, and he would even drag himself as far as the door to bask
in the life-giving sunshine.

"It do hearten me up so," he said one morning, as he glowed in the hot
May sun.  "It's a job to keep back the flies, though.  They get
owdacious in this weather, and they do plague me cruel."

"I'll keep them off you, uncle," said Norah.

"Eh, but it's fine!  This sunshine makes me think o' the glory to come.
You might read me a bit o' the Bible, lass.  I find it wonderful
soothing."

"What part would you like, uncle?"

"Oh, them wars."

"The wars?"

"Aye, keep to the wars!  Give me the Old Testament for choice.  There's
more taste to it, to my mind.  When parson comes he wants to get off to
something else; but it's Joshua or nothing with me.  Them Israelites
was good soldiers--good growed soldiers, all of 'em."

"But, uncle," pleaded Norah, "it's all peace in the next world."

"No, it ain't, gal."

"Oh, yes, uncle, surely!"

The old corporal knocked his stick irritably upon the ground.  "I tell
ye it ain't, gal.  I asked parson."

"Well, what did he say?"

"He said there was to be a last fight.  He even gave it a name, he did.
The battle of Arm--Arm----"

"Armageddon."

"Aye, that's the name parson said.  I 'specs the Third Guards'll be
there.  And the Dook--the Dook'll have a word to say."

An elderly, grey-whiskered gentleman had been walking down the street,
glancing up at the numbers of the houses.  Now as his eyes fell upon
the old man, he came straight for him.

"Hullo!" said he; "perhaps you are Gregory Brewster?"

"My name, sir," answered the veteran.

"You are the same Brewster, as I understand, who is on the roll of the
Scots Guards as having been present at the battle of Waterloo?"

"I am that man, sir, though we called it the Third Guards in those
days.  It was a fine ridgment, and they only need me to make up a full
muster."

"Tut, tut! they'll have to wait years for that," said the gentleman
heartily.  "But I am the colonel of the Scots Guards, and I thought I
would like to have a word with you."

Old Gregory Brewster was up in an instant, with his hand to his
rabbit-skin cap.  "God bless me!" he cried, "to think of it! to think
of it!"

"Hadn't the gentleman better come in?" suggested the practical Norah
from behind the door.

"Surely, sir, surely; walk in, sir, if I may be so bold."  In his
excitement he had forgotten his stick, and as he led the way into the
parlour his knees tottered, and he threw out his hands.  In an instant
the colonel had caught him on one side and Norah on the other.

"Easy and steady," said the colonel, as he led him to his armchair.

"Thank ye, sir; I was near gone that time.  But, Lordy I why, I can
scarce believe it.  To think of me the corporal of the flank company
and you the colonel of the battalion!  How things come round, to be
sure!"

"Why, we are very proud of you in London," said the colonel.  "And so
you are actually one of the men who held Hougoumont."  He looked at the
bony, trembling hands, with their huge, knotted knuckles, the stringy
throat, and the heaving, rounded shoulders.  Could this, indeed, be the
last of that band of heroes?  Then he glanced at the half-filled
phials, the blue liniment bottles, the long-spouted kettle, and the
sordid details of the sick room.  "Better, surely, had he died under
the blazing rafters of the Belgian farmhouse," thought the colonel.

"I hope that you are pretty comfortable and happy," he remarked after a
pause.

"Thank ye, sir.  I have a good deal o' trouble with my toobes--a deal
o' trouble.  You wouldn't think the job it is to cut the phlegm.  And I
need my rations.  I gets cold without 'em.  And the flies!  I ain't
strong enough to fight against them."

"How's the memory?" asked the colonel.

"Oh, there ain't nothing amiss there.  Why, sir, I could give you the
name of every man in Captain Haldane's flank company."

"And the battle--you remember it?"

"Why, I sees it all afore me every time I shuts my eyes.  Lordy, sir,
you wouldn't hardly believe how clear it is to me.  There's our line
from the paregoric bottle right along to the snuff box.  D'ye see?
Well, then, the pill box is for Hougoumont on the right--where we
was--and Norah's thimble for La Haye Sainte.  There it is, all right,
sir; and here were our guns, and here behind the reserves and the
Belgians.  Ach, them Belgians!"  He spat furiously into the fire.
"Then here's the French, where my pipe lies; and over here, where I put
my baccy pouch, was the Proosians a-comin' up on our left flank.
Jimini, but it was a glad sight to see the smoke of their guns!"

"And what was it that struck you most now in connection with the whole
affair?" asked the colonel.

"I lost three half-crowns over it, I did," crooned old Brewster.  "I
shouldn't wonder if I was never to get that money now.  I lent 'em to
Jabez Smith, my rear rank man, in Brussels.  'Only till pay-day, Grig,'
says he.  By Gosh! he was stuck by a lancer at Quatre Bras, and me with
not so much as a slip o' paper to prove the debt!  Them three
half-crowns is as good as lost to me."

The colonel rose from his chair laughing.  "The officers of the Guards
want you to buy yourself some little trifle which may add to your
comfort," he said.  "It is not from me, so you need not thank me." He
took up the old man's tobacco pouch and slipped a crisp banknote inside
it.

"Thank ye kindly, sir.  But there's one favour that I would like to ask
you, colonel."

"Yes, my man."

"If I'm called, colonel, you won't grudge me a flag and a firing party?
I'm not a civilian; I'm a guardsman--I'm the last of the old Third
Guards."

"All right, my man, I'll see to it," said the colonel.  "Good-bye; I
hope to have nothing but good news from you."

"A kind gentleman, Norah," croaked old Brewster, as they saw him walk
past the window; "but, Lordy, he ain't fit to hold the stirrup o' my
Colonel Byng!"

It was on the very next day that the old corporal took a sudden change
for the worse.  Even the golden sunlight streaming through the window
seemed unable to warm that withered frame.  The doctor came and shook
his head in silence.  All day the man lay with only his puffing blue
lips and the twitching of his scraggy neck to show that he still held
the breath of life.  Norah and Sergeant Macdonald had sat by him in the
afternoon, but he had shown no consciousness of their presence.  He lay
peacefully, his eyes half closed, his hands under his cheek, as one who
is very weary.

They had left him for an instant and were sitting in the front room,
where Norah was preparing tea, when of a sudden they heard a shout that
rang through the house.  Loud and clear and swelling, it pealed in
their ears--a voice full of strength and energy and fiery passion.
"The Guards need powder!" it cried; and yet again, "The Guards need
powder!"

The sergeant sprang from his chair and rushed in, followed by the
trembling Norah.  There was the old man standing up, his blue eyes
sparkling, his white hair bristling, his whole figure towering and
expanding, with eagle head and glance of fire.  "The Guards need
powder!" he thundered once again, "and, by God, they shall have it!" He
threw up his long arms, and sank back with a groan into his chair.  The
sergeant stooped over him,  and his face darkened.

"Oh, Archie, Archie," sobbed the frightened girl, "what do you think of
him?"

The sergeant turned away.  "I think," said he, "that the Third Guards
have a full muster now."




THE THIRD GENERATION.

Scudamore Lane, sloping down riverwards from just behind the Monument,
lies at night in the shadow of two black and monstrous walls which loom
high above the glimmer of the scattered gas lamps.  The footpaths are
narrow, and the causeway is paved with rounded cobblestones, so that
the endless drays roar along it like breaking waves.  A few
old-fashioned houses lie scattered among the business premises, and in
one of these, half-way down on the left-hand side, Dr. Horace Selby
conducts his large practice.  It is a singular street for so big a man;
but a specialist who has an European reputation can afford to live
where he likes.  In his particular branch, too, patients do not always
regard seclusion as a disadvantage.

It was only ten o'clock.  The dull roar of the traffic which converged
all day upon London Bridge had died away now to a mere confused murmur.
It was raining heavily, and the gas shone dimly through the streaked
and dripping glass, throwing little circles upon the glistening
cobblestones.  The air was full of the sounds of the rain, the thin
swish of its fall, the heavier drip from the eaves, and the swirl and
gurgle down the two steep gutters and through the sewer grating.  There
was only one figure in the whole length of Scudamore Lane.  It was that
of a man, and it stood outside the door of Dr. Horace Selby.

He had just rung and was waiting for an answer.  The fanlight beat full
upon the gleaming shoulders of his waterproof and upon his upturned
features.  It was a wan, sensitive, clear-cut face, with some subtle,
nameless peculiarity in its expression, something of the startled horse
in the white-rimmed eye, something too of the helpless child in the
drawn cheek and the weakening of the lower lip.  The man-servant knew
the stranger as a patient at a bare glance at those frightened eyes.
Such a look had been seen at that door many times before.

"Is the doctor in?"

The man hesitated.

"He has had a few friends to dinner, sir.  He does not like to be
disturbed outside his usual hours, sir."

"Tell him that I MUST see him.  Tell him that it is of the very first
importance.  Here is my card."  He fumbled with his trembling fingers
in trying to draw one from his case.  "Sir Francis Norton is the name.
Tell him that Sir Francis Norton, of Deane Park, must see him without
delay."

"Yes, sir."  The butler closed his fingers upon the card and the
half-sovereign which accompanied it.  "Better hang your coat up here in
the hall.  It is very wet.  Now if you will wait here in the
consulting-room, I have no doubt that I shall be able to send the
doctor in to you."

It was a large and lofty room in which the young baronet found himself.
The carpet was so soft and thick that his feet made no sound as he
walked across it.  The two gas jets were turned only half-way up, and
the dim light with the faint aromatic smell which filled the air had a
vaguely religious suggestion.  He sat down in a shining leather
armchair by the smouldering fire and looked gloomily about him.  Two
sides of the room were taken up with books, fat and sombre, with broad
gold lettering upon their backs.  Beside him was the high,
old-fashioned mantelpiece of white marble--the top of it strewed with
cotton wadding and bandages, graduated measures, and little bottles.
There was one with a broad neck just above him containing bluestone,
and another narrower one with what looked like the ruins of a broken
pipestem and "Caustic" outside upon a red label.  Thermometers,
hypodermic syringes bistouries and spatulas were scattered about both
on the mantelpiece and on the central table on either side of the
sloping desk.  On the same table, to the right, stood copies of the
five books which Dr. Horace Selby had written upon the subject with
which his name is peculiarly associated, while on the left, on the top
of a red medical directory, lay a huge glass model of a human eye the
size of a turnip, which opened down the centre to expose the lens and
double chamber within.

Sir Francis Norton had never been remarkable for his powers of
observation, and yet he found himself watching these trifles with the
keenest attention.  Even the corrosion of the cork of an acid bottle
caught his eye, and he wondered that the doctor did not use glass
stoppers.  Tiny scratches where the light glinted off from the table,
little stains upon the leather of the desk, chemical formulae scribbled
upon the labels of the phials--nothing was too slight to arrest his
attention.  And his sense of hearing was equally alert.  The heavy
ticking of the solemn black clock above the mantelpiece struck quite
painfully upon his ears.  Yet in spite of it, and in spite also of the
thick, old-fashioned wooden partition, he could hear voices of men
talking in the next room, and could even catch scraps of their
conversation.  "Second hand was bound to take it." "Why, you drew the
last of them yourself!"

"How could I play the queen when I knew that the ace was against me?"
The phrases came in little spurts falling back into the dull murmur of
conversation.  And then suddenly he heard the creaking of a door and a
step in the hall, and knew with a tingling mixture of impatience and
horror that the crisis of his life was at hand.

Dr. Horace Selby was a large, portly man with an imposing presence.
His nose and chin were bold and pronounced, yet his features were
puffy, a combination which would blend more freely with the wig and
cravat of the early Georges than with the close-cropped hair and black
frock-coat of the end of the nineteenth century.  He was clean shaven,
for his mouth was too good to cover--large, flexible, and sensitive,
with a kindly human softening at either corner which with his brown
sympathetic eyes had drawn out many a shame-struck sinner's secret.
Two masterful little bushy side-whiskers bristled out from under his
ears spindling away upwards to merge in the thick curves of his
brindled hair.  To his patients there was something reassuring in the
mere bulk and dignity of the man.  A high and easy bearing in medicine
as in war bears with it a hint of victories in the past, and a promise
of others to come.  Dr. Horace Selby's face was a consolation, and so
too were the large, white, soothing hands, one of which he held out to
his visitor.

"I am sorry to have kept you waiting.  It is a conflict of duties, you
perceive--a host's to his guests and an adviser's to his patient.  But
now I am entirely at your disposal, Sir Francis.  But dear me, you are
very cold."

"Yes, I am cold."

"And you are trembling all over.  Tut, tut, this will never do!  This
miserable night has chilled you.  Perhaps some little stimulant----"

"No, thank you.  I would really rather not.  And it is not the night
which has chilled me.  I am frightened, doctor."

The doctor half-turned in his chair, and he patted the arch of the
young man's knee, as he might the neck of a restless horse.

"What then?" he asked, looking over his shoulder at the pale face with
the startled eyes.

Twice the young man parted his lips.  Then he stooped with a sudden
gesture, and turning up the right leg of his trousers he pulled down
his sock and thrust forward his shin.  The doctor made a clicking noise
with his tongue as he glanced at it.

"Both legs?"

"No, only one."

"Suddenly?"

"This morning."

"Hum."

The doctor pouted his lips, and drew his finger and thumb down the line
of his chin.  "Can you account for it?" he asked briskly.

"No."

A trace of sternness came into the large brown eyes.

"I need not point out to you that unless the most absolute
frankness----"

The patient sprang from his chair.  "So help me God!" he cried, "I have
nothing in my life with which to reproach myself.  Do you think that I
would be such a fool as to come here and tell you lies.  Once for all,
I have nothing to regret."  He was a pitiful, half-tragic and
half-grotesque figure, as he stood with one trouser leg rolled to the
knee, and that ever present horror still lurking in his eyes.  A burst
of merriment came from the card-players in the next room, and the two
looked at each other in silence.

"Sit down," said the doctor abruptly, "your assurance is quite
sufficient."  He stooped and ran his finger down the line of the young
man's shin, raising it at one point.  "Hum, serpiginous," he murmured,
shaking his head.  "Any other symptoms?"

"My eyes have been a little weak."

"Let me see your teeth."  He glanced at them, and again made the
gentle, clicking sound of sympathy and disapprobation.

"Now your eye."  He lit a lamp at the patient's elbow, and holding a
small crystal lens to concentrate the light, he threw it obliquely upon
the patient's eye.  As he did so a glow of pleasure came over his large
expressive face, a flush of such enthusiasm as the botanist feels when
he packs the rare plant into his tin knapsack, or the astronomer when
the long-sought comet first swims into the field of his telescope.

"This is very typical--very typical indeed," he murmured, turning to
his desk and jotting down a few memoranda upon a sheet of paper.
"Curiously enough, I am writing a monograph upon the subject.  It is
singular that you should have been able to furnish so well-marked a
case."  He had so forgotten the patient in his symptom, that he had
assumed an almost congratulatory air towards its possessor.  He
reverted to human sympathy again, as his patient asked for particulars.

"My dear sir, there is no occasion for us to go into strictly
professional details together," said he soothingly.  "If, for example,
I were to say that you have interstitial keratitis, how would you be
the wiser?  There are indications of a strumous diathesis.  In broad
terms, I may say that you have a constitutional and hereditary taint."

The young baronet sank back in his chair, and his chin fell forwards
upon his chest.  The doctor sprang to a side-table and poured out half
a glass of liqueur brandy which he held to his patient's lips.  A
little fleck of colour came into his cheeks as he drank it down.

"Perhaps I spoke a little abruptly," said the doctor, "but you must
have known the nature of your complaint.  Why, otherwise, should you
have come to me?"

"God help me, I suspected it; but only today when my leg grew bad.  My
father had a leg like this."

"It was from him, then----?"

"No, from my grandfather.  You have heard of Sir Rupert Norton, the
great Corinthian?"

The doctor was a man of wide reading with a retentive, memory.  The
name brought back instantly to him the remembrance of the sinister
reputation of its owner--a notorious buck of the thirties--who had
gambled and duelled and steeped himself in drink and debauchery, until
even the vile set with whom he consorted had shrunk away from him in
horror, and left him to a sinister old age with the barmaid wife whom
he had married in some drunken frolic.  As he looked at the young man
still leaning back in the leather chair, there seemed for the instant
to flicker up behind him some vague presentiment of that foul old dandy
with his dangling seals, many-wreathed scarf, and dark satyric face.
What was he now?  An armful of bones in a mouldy box.  But his deeds--
they were living and rotting the blood in the veins of an innocent man.

"I see that you have heard of him," said the young baronet.  "He died
horribly, I have been told; but not more horribly than he had lived.
My father was his only son.  He was a studious man, fond of books and
canaries and the country; but his innocent life did not save him."

"His symptoms were cutaneous, I understand."

"He wore gloves in the house.  That was the first thing I can remember.
And then it was his throat.  And then his legs.  He used to ask me so
often about my own health, and I thought him so fussy, for how could I
tell what the meaning of it was.  He was always watching me--always
with a sidelong eye fixed upon me.  Now, at last, I know what he was
watching for."

"Had you brothers or sisters?"

"None, thank God."

"Well, well, it is a sad case, and very typical of many which come in
my way.  You are no lonely sufferer, Sir Francis.  There are many
thousands who bear the same cross as you do."

"But where is the justice of it, doctor?" cried the young man,
springing from his chair and pacing up and down the consulting-room.
"If I were heir to my grandfather's sins as well as to their results, I
could understand it, but I am of my father's type.  I love all that is
gentle and beautiful--music and poetry and art.  The coarse and animal
is abhorrent to me.  Ask any of my friends and they would tell you
that.  And now that this vile, loathsome thing--ach, I am polluted to
the marrow, soaked in abomination!  And why?  Haven't I a right to ask
why?  Did I do it?  Was it my fault?  Could I help being born?  And
look at me now, blighted and blasted, just as life was at its sweetest.
Talk about the sins of the father--how about the sins of the Creator?"
He shook his two clinched hands in the air--the poor impotent atom with
his pin-point of brain caught in the whirl of the infinite.

The doctor rose and placing his hands upon his shoulders he pressed him
back into his chair once more.  "There, there, my dear lad," said he;
"you must not excite yourself.  You are trembling all over.  Your
nerves cannot stand it.  We must take these great questions upon trust.
What are we, after all?  Half-evolved creatures in a transition stage,
nearer perhaps to the Medusa on the one side than to perfected humanity
on the other.  With half a complete brain we can't expect to understand
the whole of a complete fact, can we, now?  It is all very dim and
dark, no doubt; but I think that Pope's famous couplet sums up the
whole matter, and from my heart, after fifty years of varied
experience, I can say----"

But the young baronet gave a cry of impatience and disgust.  "Words,
words, words!  You can sit comfortably there in your chair and say
them--and think them too, no doubt.  You've had your life, but I've
never had mine.  You've healthy blood in your veins; mine is putrid.
And yet I am as innocent as you.  What would words do for you if you
were in this chair and I in that?  Ah, it's such a mockery and a
make-believe!  Don't think me rude, though, doctor.  I don't mean to be
that.  I only say that it is impossible for you or any other man to
realise it.  But I've a question to ask you, doctor.  It's one on which
my whole life must depend."  He writhed his fingers together in an
agony of apprehension.

"Speak out, my dear sir.  I have every sympathy with you."

"Do you think--do you think the poison has spent itself on me?  Do you
think that if I had children they would suffer?"

"I can only give one answer to that.  'The third and fourth
generation,' says the trite old text.  You may in time eliminate it
from your system, but many years must pass before you can think of
marriage."

"I am to be married on Tuesday," whispered the patient.

It was the doctor's turn to be thrilled with horror.  There were not
many situations which would yield such a sensation to his seasoned
nerves.  He sat in silence while the babble of the card-table broke in
upon them again.  "We had a double ruff if you had returned a heart."
"I was bound to clear the trumps."  They were hot and angry about it.

"How could you?" cried the doctor severely.  "It was criminal."

"You forget that I have only learned how I stand to-day."  He put his
two hands to his temples and pressed them convulsively.  "You are a man
of the world, Dr. Selby.  You have seen or heard of such things before.
Give me some advice.  I'm in your hands.  It is all very sudden and
horrible, and I don't think I am strong enough to bear it."

The doctor's heavy brows thickened into two straight lines, and he bit
his nails in perplexity.

"The marriage must not take place."

"Then what am I to do?"

"At all costs it must not take place."

"And I must give her up?"

"There can be no question about that."

The young man took out a pocketbook and drew from it a small
photograph, holding it out towards the doctor.  The firm face softened
as he looked at it.

"It is very hard on you, no doubt.  I can appreciate it more now that I
have seen that.  But there is no alternative at all.  You must give up
all thought of it."

"But this is madness, doctor--madness, I tell you.  No, I won't raise
my voice.  I forgot myself.  But realise it, man.  I am to be married
on Tuesday.  This coming Tuesday, you understand.  And all the world
knows it.  How can I put such a public affront upon her.  It would be
monstrous."

"None the less it must be done.  My dear lad, there is no way out of
it."

"You would have me simply write brutally and break the engagement at
the last moment without a reason.  I tell you I couldn't do it."

"I had a patient once who found himself in a somewhat similar situation
some years ago," said the doctor thoughtfully.  "His device was a
singular one.  He deliberately committed a penal offence, and so
compelled the young lady's people to withdraw their consent to the
marriage."

The young baronet shook his head.  "My personal honour is as yet
unstained," said he.  "I have little else left, but that, at least, I
will preserve."

"Well, well, it is a nice dilemma, and the choice lies with you."

"Have you no other suggestion?"

"You don't happen to have property in Australia?"

"None."

"But you have capital?"

"Yes."

"Then you could buy some.  To-morrow morning would do.  A thousand
mining shares would be enough.  Then you might write to say that urgent
business affairs have compelled you to start at an hour's notice to
inspect your property.  That would give you six months, at any rate."

"Well, that would be possible.  Yes, certainly, it would be possible.
But think of her position.  The house full of wedding presents--guests
coming from a distance.  It is awful.  And you say that there is no
alternative."

The doctor shrugged his shoulders.

"Well, then, I might write it now, and start to-morrow--eh?  Perhaps
you would let me use your desk.  Thank you.  I am so sorry to keep you
from your guests so long.  But I won't be a moment now."

He wrote an abrupt note of a few lines.  Then with a sudden impulse he
tore it to shreds and flung it into the fireplace.

"No, I can't sit down and tell her a lie, doctor," he said rising.  "We
must find some other way out of this.  I will think it over and let you
know my decision.  You must allow me to double your fee as I have taken
such an unconscionable time.  Now good-bye, and thank you a thousand
times for your sympathy and advice."

"Why, dear me, you haven't even got your prescription yet.  This is the
mixture, and I should recommend one of these powders every morning, and
the chemist will put all directions upon the ointment box.  You are
placed in a cruel situation, but I trust that these may be but passing
clouds.  When may I hope to hear from you again?"

"To-morrow morning."

"Very good.  How the rain is splashing in the street!  You have your
waterproof there.  You will need it.  Good-bye, then, until to-morrow."

He opened the door.  A gust of cold, damp air swept into the hall.  And
yet the doctor stood for a minute or more watching the lonely figure
which passed slowly through the yellow splotches of the gas lamps, and
into the broad bars of darkness between.  It was but his own shadow
which trailed up the wall as he passed the lights, and yet it looked to
the doctor's eye as though some huge and sombre figure walked by a
manikin's side and led him silently up the lonely street.

Dr. Horace Selby heard again of his patient next morning, and rather
earlier than he had expected.  A paragraph in the Daily News caused him
to push away his breakfast untasted, and turned him sick and faint
while he read it.  "A Deplorable Accident," it was headed, and it ran
in this way:

"A fatal accident of a peculiarly painful character is reported from
King William Street.  About eleven o'clock last night a young man was
observed while endeavouring to get out of the way of a hansom to slip
and fall under the wheels of a heavy, two-horse dray.  On being picked
up his injuries were found to be of the most shocking character, and he
expired while being conveyed to the hospital.  An examination of his
pocketbook and cardcase shows beyond any question that the deceased is
none other than Sir Francis Norton, of Deane Park, who has only within
the last year come into the baronetcy.  The accident is made the more
deplorable as the deceased, who was only just of age, was on the eve of
being married to a young lady belonging to one of the oldest families
in the South.  With his wealth and his talents the ball of fortune was
at his feet, and his many friends will be deeply grieved to know that
his promising career has been cut short in so sudden and tragic a
fashion."




A FALSE START.

"Is Dr. Horace Wilkinson at home?"

"I am he.  Pray step in."

The visitor looked somewhat astonished at having the door opened to him
by the master of the house.

"I wanted to have a few words."

The doctor, a pale, nervous young man, dressed in an
ultra-professional, long black frock-coat, with a high, white collar
cutting off his dapper side-whiskers in the centre, rubbed his hands
together and smiled.  In the thick, burly man in front of him he
scented a patient, and it would be his first.  His scanty resources had
begun to run somewhat low, and, although he had his first quarter's
rent safely locked away in the right-hand drawer of his desk, it was
becoming a question with him how he should meet the current expenses of
his very simple housekeeping.  He bowed, therefore, waved his visitor
in, closed the hall door in a careless fashion, as though his own
presence thereat had been a purely accidental circumstance, and finally
led the burly stranger into his scantily furnished front room, where he
motioned him to a seat.  Dr. Wilkinson planted himself behind his desk,
and, placing his finger-tips together, he gazed with some apprehension
at his companion.  What was the matter with the man?  He seemed very
red in the face.  Some of his old professors would have diagnosed his
case by now, and would have electrified the patient by describing his
own symptoms before he had said a word about them.  Dr. Horace
Wilkinson racked his brains for some clue, but Nature had fashioned him
as a plodder--a very reliable plodder and nothing more.  He could think
of nothing save that the visitor's watch-chain had a very brassy
appearance, with a corollary to the effect that he would be lucky if he
got half-a-crown out of him.  Still, even half-a-crown was something in
those early days of struggle.

Whilst the doctor had been running his eyes over the stranger, the
latter had been plunging his hands into pocket after pocket of his
heavy coat.  The heat of the weather, his dress, and this exercise of
pocket-rummaging had all combined to still further redden his face,
which had changed from brick to beet, with a gloss of moisture on his
brow.  This extreme ruddiness brought a clue at last to the observant
doctor.  Surely it was not to be attained without alcohol.  In alcohol
lay the secret of this man's trouble.  Some little delicacy was needed,
however, in showing him that he had read his case aright--that at a
glance he had penetrated to the inmost sources of his ailments.

"It's very hot," observed the stranger, mopping his forehead.

"Yes, it is weather which tempts one to drink rather more beer than is
good for one," answered Dr. Horace Wilkinson, looking very knowingly at
his companion from over his finger-tips.

"Dear, dear, you shouldn't do that."

"I!  I never touch beer."

"Neither do I.  I've been an abstainer for twenty years."

This was depressing.  Dr. Wilkinson blushed until he was nearly as red
as the other.  "May I ask what I can do for you?" he asked, picking up
his stethoscope and tapping it gently against his thumb-nail.

"Yes, I was just going to tell you.  I heard of your coming, but I
couldn't get round before----"  He broke into a nervous little cough.

"Yes?" said the doctor encouragingly.

"I should have been here three weeks ago, but you know how these things
get put off."  He coughed again behind his large red hand.

"I do not think that you need say anything more," said the doctor,
taking over the case with an easy air of command.  "Your cough is quite
sufficient.  It is entirely bronchial by the sound.  No doubt the
mischief is circumscribed at present, but there is always the danger
that it may spread, so you have done wisely to come to me.  A little
judicious treatment will soon set you right.  Your waistcoat, please,
but not your shirt.  Puff out your chest and say ninety-nine in a deep
voice."

The red-faced man began to laugh.  "It's all right, doctor," said he.
"That cough comes from chewing tobacco, and I know it's a very bad
habit.  Nine-and-ninepence is what I have to say to you, for I'm the
officer of the gas company, and they have a claim against you for that
on the metre."

Dr. Horace Wilkinson collapsed into his chair.  "Then you're not a
patient?" he gasped.

"Never needed a doctor in my life, sir."

"Oh, that's all right."  The doctor concealed his disappointment under
an affectation of facetiousness.  "You don't look as if you troubled
them much.  I don't know what we should do if every one were as robust.
I shall call at the company's offices and pay this small amount."

"If you could make it convenient, sir, now that I am here, it would
save trouble----"

"Oh, certainly!"  These eternal little sordid money troubles were more
trying to the doctor than plain living or scanty food.  He took out his
purse and slid the contents on to the table.  There were two
half-crowns and some pennies.  In his drawer he had ten golden
sovereigns.  But those were his rent.  If he once broke in upon them he
was lost.  He would starve first.

"Dear me!" said he, with a smile, as at some strange, unheard-of
incident.  "I have run short of small change.  I am afraid I shall have
to call upon the company, after all."

"Very well, sir." The inspector rose, and with a practised glance
around, which valued every article in the room, from the two-guinea
carpet to the eight-shilling muslin curtains, he took his departure.

When he had gone Dr. Wilkinson rearranged his room, as was his habit a
dozen times in the day.  He laid out his large Quain's Dictionary of
Medicine in the forefront of the table so as to impress the casual
patient that he had ever the best authorities at his elbow.  Then he
cleared all the little instruments out of his pocket-case--the
scissors, the forceps, the bistouries, the lancets--and he laid them
all out beside the stethoscope, to make as good a show as possible.
His ledger, day-book, and visiting-book were spread in front of him.
There was no entry in any of them yet, but it would not look well to
have the covers too glossy and new, so he rubbed them together and
daubed ink over them.  Neither would it be well that any patient should
observe that his name was the first in the book, so he filled up the
first page of each with notes of imaginary visits paid to nameless
patients during the last three weeks.  Having done all this, he rested
his head upon his hands and relapsed into the terrible occupation of
waiting.

Terrible enough at any time to the young professional man, but most of
all to one who knows that the weeks, and even the days during which he
can hold out are numbered.  Economise as he would, the money would
still slip away in the countless little claims which a man never
understands until he lives under a rooftree of his own.  Dr. Wilkinson
could not deny, as he sat at his desk and looked at the little heap of
silver and coppers, that his chances of being a successful practitioner
in Sutton were rapidly vanishing away.

And yet it was a bustling, prosperous town, with so much money in it
that it seemed strange that a man with a trained brain and dexterous
fingers should be starved out of it for want of employment.  At his
desk, Dr. Horace Wilkinson could see the never-ending double current of
people which ebbed and flowed in front of his window.  It was a busy
street, and the air was forever filled with the dull roar of life, the
grinding of the wheels, and the patter of countless feet.  Men, women,
and children, thousands and thousands of them passed in the day, and
yet each was hurrying on upon his own business, scarce glancing at the
small brass plate, or wasting a thought upon the man who waited in the
front room.  And yet how many of them would obviously, glaringly have
been the better for his professional assistance.  Dyspeptic men, anemic
women, blotched faces, bilious complexions--they flowed past him, they
needing him, he needing them, and yet the remorseless bar of
professional etiquette kept them forever apart.  What could he do?
Could he stand at his own front door, pluck the casual stranger by the
sleeve, and whisper in his ear, "Sir, you will forgive me for remarking
that you are suffering from a severe attack of acne rosacea, which
makes you a peculiarly unpleasant object.  Allow me to suggest that a
small prescription containing arsenic, which will not cost you more
than you often spend upon a single meal, will be very much to your
advantage."  Such an address would be a degradation to the high and
lofty profession of Medicine, and there are no such sticklers for the
ethics of that profession as some to whom she has been but a bitter and
a grudging mother.

Dr. Horace Wilkinson was still looking moodily out of the window, when
there came a sharp clang at the bell.  Often it had rung, and with
every ring his hopes had sprung up, only to dwindle away again, and
change to leaden disappointment, as he faced some beggar or touting
tradesman.  But the doctor's spirit was young and elastic, and again,
in spite of all experience, it responded to that exhilarating summons.
He sprang to his feet, cast his eyes over the table, thrust out his
medical books a little more prominently, and hurried to the door.  A
groan escaped him as he entered the hall.  He could see through the
half-glazed upper panels that a gypsy van, hung round with wicker
tables and chairs, had halted before his door, and that a couple of the
vagrants, with a baby, were waiting outside.  He had learned by
experience that it was better not even to parley with such people.

"I have nothing for you," said he, loosing the latch by an inch.  "Go
away!"

He closed the door, but the bell clanged once more.  "Get away!  Get
away!" he cried impatiently, and walked back into his consulting-room.
He had hardly seated himself when the bell went for the third time.  In
a towering passion he rushed back, flung open the door.

"What the----?"

"If you please, sir, we need a doctor."

In an instant he was rubbing his hands again with his blandest
professional smile.  These were patients, then, whom he had tried to
hunt from his doorstep--the very first patients, whom he had waited for
so impatiently.  They did not look very promising.  The man, a tall,
lank-haired gypsy, had gone back to the horse's head.  There remained a
small, hard-faced woman with a great bruise all round her eye.  She
wore a yellow silk handkerchief round her head, and a baby, tucked in a
red shawl, was pressed to her bosom.

"Pray step in, madam," said Dr. Horace Wilkinson, with his very best
sympathetic manner.  In this case, at least, there could be no mistake
as to diagnosis.  "If you will sit on this sofa, I shall very soon make
you feel much more comfortable."

He poured a little water from his carafe into a saucer, made a compress
of lint, fastened it over the injured eye, and secured the whole with a
spica bandage, secundum artem.

"Thank ye kindly, sir," said the woman, when his work was finished;
"that's nice and warm, and may God bless your honour.  But it wasn't
about my eye at all that I came to see a doctor."

"Not your eye?" Dr. Horace Wilkinson was beginning to be a little
doubtful as to the advantages of quick diagnosis.  It is an excellent
thing to be able to surprise a patient, but hitherto it was always the
patient who had surprised him.

"The baby's got the measles."

The mother parted the red shawl, and exhibited a little dark,
black-eyed gypsy baby, whose swarthy face was all flushed and mottled
with a dark-red rash.  The child breathed with a rattling sound, and it
looked up at the doctor with eyes which were heavy with want of sleep
and crusted together at the lids.

"Hum!  Yes.  Measles, sure enough--and a smart attack."

"I just wanted you to see her, sir, so that you could signify."

"Could what?"

"Signify, if anything happened."

"Oh, I see--certify."

"And now that you've seen it, sir, I'll go on, for Reuben--that's my
man--is in a hurry."

"But don't you want any medicine?"

"Oh, now you've seen it, it's all right.  I'll let you know if anything
happens."

"But you must have some medicine.  The child is very ill."  He
descended into the little room which he had fitted as a surgery, and he
made up a two-ounce bottle of cooling medicine.  In such cities as
Sutton there are few patients who can afford to pay a fee to both
doctor and chemist, so that unless the physician is prepared to play
the part of both he will have little chance of making a living at
either.

"There is your medicine, madam.  You will find the directions upon the
bottle.  Keep the child warm and give it a light diet."

"Thank you kindly, sir." She shouldered her baby and marched for the
door.

"Excuse me, madam," said the doctor nervously.  "Don't you think it too
small a matter to make a bill of?  Perhaps it would be better if we had
a settlement at once."

The gypsy woman looked at him reproachfully out of her one uncovered
eye.

"Are you going to charge me for that?" she asked.  "How much, then?"

"Well, say half-a-crown."  He mentioned the sum in a half-jesting way,
as though it were too small to take serious notice of, but the gypsy
woman raised quite a scream at the mention of it.

"'Arf-a-crown! for that?"

"Well, my good woman, why not go to the poor doctor if you cannot
afford a fee?"

She fumbled in her pocket, craning awkwardly to keep her grip upon the
baby.

"Here's sevenpence," she said at last, holding out a little pile of
copper coins.  "I'll give you that and a wicker footstool."

"But my fee is half-a-crown."  The doctor's views of the glory of his
profession cried out against this wretched haggling, and yet what was
he to do?  "Where am I to get 'arf-a-crown?  It is well for gentlefolk
like you who sit in your grand houses, and can eat and drink what you
like, an' charge 'arf-a-crown for just saying as much as, ''Ow d'ye
do?'  We can't pick up' arf-crowns like that.  What we gets we earns
'ard.  This sevenpence is just all I've got.  You told me to feed the
child light.  She must feed light, for what she's to have is more than
I know."

Whilst the woman had been speaking, Dr. Horace Wilkinson's eyes had
wandered to the tiny heap of money upon the table, which represented
all that separated him from absolute starvation, and he chuckled to
himself at the grim joke that he should appear to this poor woman to be
a being living in the lap of luxury.  Then he picked up the odd
coppers, leaving only the two half-crowns upon the table.

"Here you are," he said brusquely.  "Never mind the fee, and take these
coppers.  They may be of some use to you.  Good-bye!"  He bowed her
out, and closed the door behind her.  After all she was the thin edge
of the wedge.  These wandering people have great powers of
recommendation.  All large practices have been built up from such
foundations.  The hangers-on to the kitchen recommend to the kitchen,
they to the drawing-room, and so it spreads.  At least he could say now
that he had had a patient.

He went into the back room and lit the spirit-kettle to boil the water
for his tea, laughing the while at the recollection of his recent
interview.  If all patients were like this one it could easily be
reckoned how many it would take to ruin him completely.  Putting aside
the dirt upon his carpet and the loss of time, there were twopence gone
upon the bandage, fourpence or more upon the medicine, to say nothing
of phial, cork, label, and paper.  Then he had given her fivepence, so
that his first patient had absorbed altogether not less than one sixth
of his available capital.  If five more were to come he would be a
broken man.  He sat down upon the portmanteau and shook with laughter
at the thought, while he measured out his one spoonful and a half of
tea at one shilling eightpence into the brown earthenware teapot.
Suddenly, however, the laugh faded from his face, and he cocked his ear
towards the door, standing listening with a slanting head and a
sidelong eye.  There had been a rasping of wheels against the curb, the
sound of steps outside, and then a loud peal at the bell.  With his
teaspoon in his hand he peeped round the corner and saw with amazement
that a carriage and pair were waiting outside, and that a powdered
footman was standing at the door.  The spoon tinkled down upon the
floor, and he stood gazing in bewilderment.  Then, pulling himself
together, he threw open the door.

"Young man," said the flunky, "tell your master, Dr. Wilkinson, that he
is wanted just as quick as ever he can come to Lady Millbank, at the
Towers.  He is to come this very instant.  We'd take him with us, but
we have to go back to see if Dr. Mason is home yet.  Just you stir your
stumps and give him the message."

The footman nodded and was off in an instant, while the coachman lashed
his horses and the carriage flew down the street.

Here was a new development.  Dr. Horace Wilkinson stood at his door and
tried to think it all out.  Lady Millbank, of the Towers!  People of
wealth and position, no doubt.  And a serious case, or why this haste
and summoning of two doctors?  But, then, why in the name of all that
is wonderful should he be sent for?

He was obscure, unknown, without influence.  There must be some
mistake.  Yes, that must be the true explanation; or was it possible
that some one was attempting a cruel hoax upon him?  At any rate, it
was too positive a message to be disregarded.  He must set off at once
and settle the matter one way or the other.

But he had one source of information.  At the corner of the street was
a small shop where one of the oldest inhabitants dispensed newspapers
and gossip.  He could get information there if anywhere.  He put on his
well-brushed top hat, secreted instruments and bandages in all his
pockets, and without waiting for his tea closed up his establishment
and started off upon his adventure.

The stationer at the corner was a human directory to every one and
everything in Sutton, so that he soon had all the information which he
wanted.  Sir John Millbank was very well known in the town, it seemed.
He was a merchant prince, an exporter of pens, three times mayor, and
reported to be fully worth two millions sterling.

The Towers was his palatial seat, just outside the city.  His wife had
been an invalid for some years, and was growing worse.  So far the
whole thing seemed to be genuine enough.  By some amazing chance these
people really had sent for him.

And then another doubt assailed him, and he turned back into the shop.

"I am your neighbour, Dr. Horace Wilkinson," said he.  "Is there any
other medical man of that name in the town?"

No, the stationer was quite positive that there was not.

That was final, then.  A great good fortune had come in his way, and he
must take prompt advantage of it.  He called a cab and drove furiously
to the Towers, with his brain in a whirl, giddy with hope and delight
at one moment, and sickened with fears and doubts at the next lest the
case should in some way be beyond his powers, or lest he should find at
some critical moment that he was without the instrument or appliance
that was needed.  Every strange and outre case of which he had ever
heard or read came back into his mind, and long before he reached the
Towers he had worked himself into a positive conviction that he would
be instantly required to do a trephining at the least.

The Towers was a very large house, standing back amid trees, at the
head of a winding drive.  As he drove up the doctor sprang out, paid
away half his worldly assets as a fare, and followed a stately footman
who, having taken his name, led him through the oak-panelled,
stained-glass hall, gorgeous with deers' heads and ancient armour, and
ushered him into a large sitting-room beyond.  A very
irritable-looking, acid-faced man was seated in an armchair by the
fireplace, while two young ladies in white were standing together in
the bow window at the further end.

"Hullo! hullo! hullo!  What's this--heh?" cried the irritable man.
"Are you Dr. Wilkinson?  Eh?"

"Yes, sir, I am Dr. Wilkinson."

"Really, now.  You seem very young--much younger than I expected.
Well, well, well, Mason's old, and yet he don't seem to know much about
it.  I suppose we must try the other end now.  You're the Wilkinson who
wrote something about the lungs?  Heh?"

Here was a light!  The only two letters which the doctor had ever
written to The Lancet--modest little letters thrust away in a back
column among the wrangles about medical ethics and the inquiries as to
how much it took to keep a horse in the country--had been upon
pulmonary disease.  They had not been wasted, then.  Some eye had
picked them out and marked the name of the writer.  Who could say that
work was ever wasted, or that merit did not promptly meet with its
reward?

"Yes, I have written on the subject."

"Ha!  Well, then, where's Mason?"

"I have not the pleasure of his acquaintance."

"No?--that's queer too.  He knows you and thinks a lot of your opinion.
You're a stranger in the town, are you not?"

"Yes, I have only been here a very short time."

"That was what Mason said.  He didn't give me the address.  Said he
would call on you and bring you, but when the wife got worse of course
I inquired for you and sent for you direct.  I sent for Mason, too, but
he was out.  However, we can't wait for him, so just run away upstairs
and do what you can."

"Well, I am placed in a rather delicate position," said Dr. Horace
Wilkinson, with some hesitation.  "I am here, as I understand, to meet
my colleague, Dr. Mason, in consultation.  It would, perhaps, hardly be
correct for me to see the patient in his absence.  I think that I would
rather wait."

"Would you, by Jove!  Do you think I'll let my wife get worse while the
doctor is coolly kicking his heels in the room below?  No, sir, I am a
plain man, and I tell you that you will either go up or go out."

The style of speech jarred upon the doctor's sense of the fitness of
things, but still when a man's wife is ill much may be overlooked.  He
contented himself by bowing somewhat stiffly.  "I shall go up, if you
insist upon it," said he.

"I do insist upon it.  And another thing, I won't have her thumped
about all over the chest, or any hocus-pocus of the sort.  She has
bronchitis and asthma, and that's all.  If you can cure it well and
good.  But it only weakens her to have you tapping and listening, and
it does no good either."

Personal disrespect was a thing that the doctor could stand; but the
profession was to him a holy thing, and a flippant word about it cut
him to the quick.

"Thank you," said he, picking up his hat.  "I have the honour to wish
you a very good day.  I do not care to undertake the responsibility of
this case."

"Hullo! what's the matter now?"

"It is not my habit to give opinions without examining my patient.  I
wonder that you should suggest such a course to a medical man.  I wish
you good day."

But Sir John Millbank was a commercial man, and believed in the
commercial principle that the more difficult a thing is to attain the
more valuable it is.  A doctor's opinion had been to him a mere matter
of guineas.  But here was a young man who seemed to care nothing either
for his wealth or title.  His respect for his judgment increased
amazingly.

"Tut! tut!" said he; "Mason is not so thin-skinned.  There! there!
Have your way!  Do what you like and I won't say another word.  I'll
just run upstairs and tell Lady Millbank that you are coming."

The door had hardly closed behind him when the two demure young ladies
darted out of their corner, and fluttered with joy in front of the
astonished doctor.

"Oh, well done! well done!" cried the taller, clapping her hands.

"Don't let him bully you, doctor," said the other.  "Oh, it was so nice
to hear you stand up to him.  That's the way he does with poor Dr.
Mason.  Dr. Mason has never examined mamma yet.  He always takes papa's
word for everything.  Hush, Maude; here he comes again."  They subsided
in an instant into their corner as silent and demure as ever.

Dr. Horace Wilkinson followed Sir John up the broad, thick-carpeted
staircase, and into the darkened sick room.  In a quarter of an hour he
had sounded and sifted the case to the uttermost, and descended with
the husband once more to the drawing-room.  In front of the fireplace
were standing two gentlemen, the one a very typical, clean-shaven,
general practitioner, the other a striking-looking man of middle age,
with pale blue eyes and a long red beard.

"Hullo, Mason, you've come at last!"

"Yes, Sir John, and I have brought, as I promised, Dr. Wilkinson with
me."

"Dr.  Wilkinson!  Why, this is he."

Dr. Mason stared in astonishment.  "I have never seen the gentleman
before!" he cried.

"Nevertheless I am Dr. Wilkinson--Dr. Horace Wilkinson, of 114 Canal
View."

"Good gracious, Sir John!" cried Dr. Mason.

"Did you think that in a case of such importance I should call in a
junior local practitioner!  This is Dr. Adam Wilkinson, lecturer on
pulmonary diseases at Regent's College, London, physician upon the
staff of the St. Swithin's Hospital, and author of a dozen works upon
the subject.  He happened to be in Sutton upon a visit, and I thought I
would utilise his presence to have a first-rate opinion upon Lady
Millbank."

"Thank you," said Sir John, dryly.  "But I fear my wife is rather tired
now, for she has just been very thoroughly examined by this young
gentleman.  I think we will let it stop at that for the present;
though, of course, as you have had the trouble of coming here, I should
be glad to have a note of your fees."

When Dr. Mason had departed, looking very disgusted, and his friend,
the specialist, very amused, Sir John listened to all the young
physician had to say about the case.

"Now, I'll tell you what," said he, when he had finished.  "I'm a man
of my word, d'ye see?  When I like a man I freeze to him.  I'm a good
friend and a bad enemy.  I believe in you, and I don't believe in
Mason.  From now on you are my doctor, and that of my family.  Come and
see my wife every day.  How does that suit your book?"

"I am extremely grateful to you for your kind intentions toward me, but
I am afraid there is no possible way in which I can avail myself of
them."

"Heh! what d'ye mean?"

"I could not possibly take Dr. Mason's place in the middle of a case
like this.  It would be a most unprofessional act."

"Oh, well, go your own way!" cried Sir John, in despair.  "Never was
such a man for making difficulties.  You've had a fair offer and you've
refused it, and now you can just go your own way."

The millionaire stumped out of the room in a huff, and Dr. Horace
Wilkinson made his way homeward to his spirit-lamp and his
one-and-eightpenny tea, with his first guinea in his pocket, and with a
feeling that he had upheld the best traditions of his profession.

And yet this false start of his was a true start also, for it soon came
to Dr. Mason's ears that his junior had had it in his power to carry
off his best patient and had forborne to do so.  To the honour of the
profession be it said that such forbearance is the rule rather than the
exception, and yet in this case, with so very junior a practitioner and
so very wealthy a patient, the temptation was greater than is usual.
There was a grateful note, a visit, a friendship, and now the
well-known firm of Mason and Wilkinson is doing the largest family
practice in Sutton.




THE CURSE OF EVE.

Robert Johnson was an essentially commonplace man, with no feature to
distinguish him from a million others.  He was pale of face, ordinary
in looks, neutral in opinions, thirty years of age, and a married man.
By trade he was a gentleman's outfitter in the New North Road, and the
competition of business squeezed out of him the little character that
was left.  In his hope of conciliating customers he had become cringing
and pliable, until working ever in the same routine from day to day he
seemed to have sunk into a soulless machine rather than a man.  No
great question had ever stirred him.  At the end of this snug century,
self-contained in his own narrow circle, it seemed impossible that any
of the mighty, primitive passions of mankind could ever reach him.  Yet
birth, and lust, and illness, and death are changeless things, and when
one of these harsh facts springs out upon a man at some sudden turn of
the path of life, it dashes off for the moment his mask of civilisation
and gives a glimpse of the stranger and stronger face below.

Johnson's wife was a quiet little woman, with brown hair and gentle
ways.  His affection for her was the one positive trait in his
character.  Together they would lay out the shop window every Monday
morning, the spotless shirts in their green cardboard boxes below, the
neckties above hung in rows over the brass rails, the cheap studs
glistening from the white cards at either side, while in the background
were the rows of cloth caps and the bank of boxes in which the more
valuable hats were screened from the sunlight.  She kept the books and
sent out the bills.  No one but she knew the joys and sorrows which
crept into his small life.  She had shared his exultations when the
gentleman who was going to India had bought ten dozen shirts and an
incredible number of collars, and she had been as stricken as he when,
after the goods had gone, the bill was returned from the hotel address
with the intimation that no such person had lodged there.  For five
years they had worked, building up the business, thrown together all
the more closely because their marriage had been a childless one.  Now,
however, there were signs that a change was at hand, and that speedily.
She was unable to come downstairs, and her mother, Mrs. Peyton, came
over from Camberwell to nurse her and to welcome her grandchild.

Little qualms of anxiety came over Johnson as his wife's time
approached.  However, after all, it was a natural process.  Other men's
wives went through it unharmed, and why should not his?  He was himself
one of a family of fourteen, and yet his mother was alive and hearty.
It was quite the exception for anything to go wrong.  And yet in spite
of his reasonings the remembrance of his wife's condition was always
like a sombre background to all his other thoughts.

Dr. Miles of Bridport Place, the best man in the neighbourhood, was
retained five months in advance, and, as time stole on, many little
packets of absurdly small white garments with frill work and ribbons
began to arrive among the big consignments of male necessities.  And
then one evening, as Johnson was ticketing the scarfs in the shop, he
heard a bustle upstairs, and Mrs. Peyton came running down to say that
Lucy was bad and that she thought the doctor ought to be there without
delay.

It was not Robert Johnson's nature to hurry.  He was prim and staid and
liked to do things in an orderly fashion.  It was a quarter of a mile
from the corner of the New North Road where his shop stood to the
doctor's house in Bridport Place.  There were no cabs in sight so he
set off upon foot, leaving the lad to mind the shop.  At Bridport Place
he was told that the doctor had just gone to Harman Street to attend a
man in a fit.  Johnson started off for Harman Street, losing a little
of his primness as he became more anxious.  Two full cabs but no empty
ones passed him on the way.  At Harman Street he learned that the
doctor had gone on to a case of measles, fortunately he had left the
address--69 Dunstan Road, at the other side of the Regent's Canal.
Robert's primness had vanished now as he thought of the women waiting
at home, and he began to run as hard as he could down the Kingsland
Road.  Some way along he sprang into a cab which stood by the curb and
drove to Dunstan Road.  The doctor had just left, and Robert Johnson
felt inclined to sit down upon the steps in despair.

Fortunately he had not sent the cab away, and he was soon back at
Bridport Place.  Dr. Miles had not returned yet, but they were
expecting him every instant.  Johnson waited, drumming his fingers on
his knees, in a high, dim lit room, the air of which was charged with a
faint, sickly smell of ether.  The furniture was massive, and the books
in the shelves were sombre, and a squat black clock ticked mournfully
on the mantelpiece.  It told him that it was half-past seven, and that
he had been gone an hour and a quarter.  Whatever would the women think
of him!  Every time that a distant door slammed he sprang from his
chair in a quiver of eagerness.  His ears strained to catch the deep
notes of the doctor's voice.  And then, suddenly, with a gush of joy he
heard a quick step outside, and the sharp click of the key in the lock.
In an instant he was out in the hall, before the doctor's foot was over
the threshold.

"If you please, doctor, I've come for you," he cried; "the wife was
taken bad at six o'clock."

He hardly knew what he expected the doctor to do.  Something very
energetic, certainly--to seize some drugs, perhaps, and rush excitedly
with him through the gaslit streets.  Instead of that Dr. Miles threw
his umbrella into the rack, jerked off his hat with a somewhat peevish
gesture, and pushed Johnson back into the room.

"Let's see!  You <i>did</i> engage me, didn't you?" he asked in no very
cordial voice.

"Oh, yes, doctor, last November.  Johnson the outfitter, you know, in
the New North Road."

"Yes, yes.  It's a bit overdue," said the doctor, glancing at a list of
names in a note-book with a very shiny cover.  "Well, how is she?"

"I don't----"

"Ah, of course, it's your first.  You'll know more about it next time."

"Mrs. Peyton said it was time you were there, sir."

"My dear sir, there can be no very pressing hurry in a first case.  We
shall have an all-night affair, I fancy.  You can't get an engine to go
without coals, Mr. Johnson, and I have had nothing but a light lunch."

"We could have something cooked for you--something hot and a cup of
tea."

"Thank you, but I fancy my dinner is actually on the table.  I can do
no good in the earlier stages.  Go home and say that I am coming, and I
will be round immediately afterwards."

A sort of horror filled Robert Johnson as he gazed at this man who
could think about his dinner at such a moment.  He had not imagination
enough to realise that the experience which seemed so appallingly
important to him, was the merest everyday matter of business to the
medical man who could not have lived for a year had he not, amid the
rush of work, remembered what was due to his own health.  To Johnson he
seemed little better than a monster.  His thoughts were bitter as he
sped back to his shop.

"You've taken your time," said his mother-in-law reproachfully, looking
down the stairs as he entered.

"I couldn't help it!" he gasped.  "Is it over?"

"Over!  She's got to be worse, poor dear, before she can be better.
Where's Dr. Miles!"

"He's coming after he's had dinner."  The old woman was about to make
some reply, when, from the half-opened door behind a high whinnying
voice cried out for her.  She ran back and closed the door, while
Johnson, sick at heart, turned into the shop.  There he sent the lad
home and busied himself frantically in putting up shutters and turning
out boxes.  When all was closed and finished he seated himself in the
parlour behind the shop.  But he could not sit still.  He rose
incessantly to walk a few paces and then fell back into a chair once
more.  Suddenly the clatter of china fell upon his ear, and he saw the
maid pass the door with a cup on a tray and a smoking teapot.

"Who is that for, Jane?" he asked.

"For the mistress, Mr. Johnson.  She says she would fancy it."

There was immeasurable consolation to him in that homely cup of tea.
It wasn't so very bad after all if his wife could think of such things.
So light-hearted was he that he asked for a cup also.  He had just
finished it when the doctor arrived, with a small black leather bag in
his hand.

"Well, how is she?" he asked genially.

"Oh, she's very much better," said Johnson, with enthusiasm.

"Dear me, that's bad!" said the doctor.  "Perhaps it will do if I look
in on my morning round?"

"No, no," cried Johnson, clutching at his thick frieze overcoat.  "We
are so glad that you have come.  And, doctor, please come down soon and
let me know what you think about it."

The doctor passed upstairs, his firm, heavy steps resounding through
the house.  Johnson could hear his boots creaking as he walked about
the floor above him, and the sound was a consolation to him.  It was
crisp and decided, the tread of a man who had plenty of
self-confidence.  Presently, still straining his ears to catch what was
going on, he heard the scraping of a chair as it was drawn along the
floor, and a moment later he heard the door fly open and someone come
rushing downstairs.  Johnson sprang up with his hair bristling,
thinking that some dreadful thing had occurred, but it was only his
mother-in-law, incoherent with excitement and searching for scissors
and some tape.  She vanished again and Jane passed up the stairs with a
pile of newly aired linen.  Then, after an interval of silence, Johnson
heard the heavy, creaking tread and the doctor came down into the
parlour.

"That's better," said he, pausing with his hand upon the door.  "You
look pale, Mr. Johnson."

"Oh no, sir, not at all," he answered deprecatingly, mopping his brow
with his handkerchief.

"There is no immediate cause for alarm," said Dr. Miles.  "The case is
not all that we could wish it.  Still we will hope for the best."

"Is there danger, sir?" gasped Johnson.

"Well, there is always danger, of course.  It is not altogether a
favourable case, but still it might be much worse.  I have given her a
draught.  I saw as I passed that they have been doing a little building
opposite to you.  It's an improving quarter.  The rents go higher and
higher.  You have a lease of your own little place, eh?"

"Yes, sir, yes!" cried Johnson, whose ears were straining for every
sound from above, and who felt none the less that it was very soothing
that the doctor should be able to chat so easily at such a time.
"That's to say no, sir, I am a yearly tenant."

"Ah, I should get a lease if I were you.  There's Marshall, the
watchmaker, down the street.  I attended his wife twice and saw him
through the typhoid when they took up the drains in Prince Street.  I
assure you his landlord sprung his rent nearly forty a year and he had
to pay or clear out."

"Did his wife get through it, doctor?"

"Oh yes, she did very well.  Hullo! hullo!"

He slanted his ear to the ceiling with a questioning face, and then
darted swiftly from the room.

It was March and the evenings were chill, so Jane had lit the fire, but
the wind drove the smoke downwards and the air was full of its acrid
taint.  Johnson felt chilled to the bone, though rather by his
apprehensions than by the weather.  He crouched over the fire with his
thin white hands held out to the blaze.  At ten o'clock Jane brought in
the joint of cold meat and laid his place for supper, but he could not
bring himself to touch it.  He drank a glass of the beer, however, and
felt the better for it.  The tension of his nerves seemed to have
reacted upon his hearing, and he was able to follow the most trivial
things in the room above.  Once, when the beer was still heartening
him, he nerved himself to creep on tiptoe up the stair and to listen to
what was going on.  The bedroom door was half an inch open, and through
the slit he could catch a glimpse of the clean-shaven face of the
doctor, looking wearier and more anxious than before.  Then he rushed
downstairs like a lunatic, and running to the door he tried to distract
his thoughts by watching what; was going on in the street.  The shops
were all shut, and some rollicking boon companions came shouting along
from the public-house.  He stayed at the door until the stragglers had
thinned down, and then came back to his seat by the fire.  In his dim
brain he was asking himself questions which had never intruded
themselves before.  Where was the justice of it?  What had his sweet,
innocent little wife done that she should be used so?  Why was nature
so cruel?  He was frightened at his own thoughts, and yet wondered that
they had never occurred to him before.

As the early morning drew in, Johnson, sick at heart and shivering in
every limb, sat with his great coat huddled round him, staring at the
grey ashes and waiting hopelessly for some relief.  His face was white
and clammy, and his nerves had been numbed into a half conscious state
by the long monotony of misery.  But suddenly all his feelings leapt
into keen life again as he heard the bedroom door open and the doctor's
steps upon the stair.  Robert Johnson was precise and unemotional in
everyday life, but he almost shrieked now as he rushed forward to know
if it were over.

One glance at the stern, drawn face which met him showed that it was no
pleasant news which had sent the doctor downstairs.  His appearance had
altered as much as Johnson's during the last few hours.  His hair was
on end, his face flushed, his forehead dotted with beads of
perspiration.  There was a peculiar fierceness in his eye, and about
the lines of his mouth, a fighting look as befitted a man who for hours
on end had been striving with the hungriest of foes for the most
precious of prizes.  But there was a sadness too, as though his grim
opponent had been overmastering him.  He sat down and leaned his head
upon his hand like a man who is fagged out.

"I thought it my duty to see you, Mr. Johnson, and to tell you that it
is a very nasty case.  Your wife's heart is not strong, and she has
some symptoms which I do not like.  What I wanted to say is that if you
would like to have a second opinion I shall be very glad to meet anyone
whom you might suggest."

Johnson was so dazed by his want of sleep and the evil news that he
could hardly grasp the doctor's meaning.  The other, seeing him
hesitate, thought that he was considering the expense.

"Smith or Hawley would come for two guineas," said he.  "But I think
Pritchard of the City Road is the best man."

"Oh, yes, bring the best man," cried Johnson.

"Pritchard would want three guineas.  He is a senior man, you see."

"I'd give him all I have if he would pull her through.  Shall I run for
him?"

"Yes.  Go to my house first and ask for the green baize bag.  The
assistant will give it to you.  Tell him I want the A. C. E. mixture.
Her heart is too weak for chloroform.  Then go for Pritchard and bring
him back with you."

It was heavenly for Johnson to have something to do and to feel that he
was of some use to his wife.  He ran swiftly to Bridport Place, his
footfalls clattering through the silent streets and the big dark
policemen turning their yellow funnels of light on him as he passed.
Two tugs at the night-bell brought down a sleepy, half-clad assistant,
who handed him a stoppered glass bottle and a cloth bag which contained
something which clinked when you moved it.  Johnson thrust the bottle
into his pocket, seized the green bag, and pressing his hat firmly down
ran as hard as he could set foot to ground until he was in the City
Road and saw the name of Pritchard engraved in white upon a red ground.
He bounded in triumph up the three steps which led to the door, and as
he did so there was a crash behind him.  His precious bottle was in
fragments upon the pavement.

For a moment he felt as if it were his wife's body that was lying
there.  But the run had freshened his wits and he saw that the mischief
might be repaired.  He pulled vigorously at the night-bell.

"Well, what's the matter?" asked a gruff voice at his elbow.  He
started back and looked up at the windows, but there was no sign of
life.  He was approaching the bell again with the intention of pulling
it, when a perfect roar burst from the wall.

"I can't stand shivering here all night," cried the voice.  "Say who
you are and what you want or I shut the tube."

Then for the first time Johnson saw that the end of a speaking-tube
hung out of the wall just above the bell.  He shouted up it,--

"I want you to come with me to meet Dr. Miles at a confinement at once."

"How far?" shrieked the irascible voice.

"The New North Road, Hoxton."

"My consultation fee is three guineas, payable at the time."

"All right," shouted Johnson.  "You are to bring a bottle of A. C. E.
mixture with you."

"All right!  Wait a bit!"

Five minutes later an elderly, hard-faced man, with grizzled hair,
flung open the door.  As he emerged a voice from somewhere in the
shadows cried,--

"Mind you take your cravat, John," and he impatiently growled something
over his shoulder in reply.

The consultant was a man who had been hardened by a life of ceaseless
labour, and who had been driven, as so many others have been, by the
needs of his own increasing family to set the commercial before the
philanthropic side of his profession.  Yet beneath his rough crust he
was a man with a kindly heart.

"We don't want to break a record," said he, pulling up and panting
after attempting to keep up with Johnson for five minutes.  "I would go
quicker if I could, my dear sir, and I quite sympathise with your
anxiety, but really I can't manage it."

So Johnson, on fire with impatience, had to slow down until they
reached the New North Road, when he ran ahead and had the door open for
the doctor when he came.  He heard the two meet outside the bed-room,
and caught scraps of their conversation.  "Sorry to knock you up--nasty
case--decent people."  Then it sank into a mumble and the door closed
behind them.

Johnson sat up in his chair now, listening keenly, for he knew that a
crisis must be at hand.  He heard the two doctors moving about, and was
able to distinguish the step of Pritchard, which had a drag in it, from
the clean, crisp sound of the other's footfall.  There was silence for
a few minutes and then a curious drunken, mumbling sing-song voice came
quavering up, very unlike anything which he had heard hitherto.  At the
same time a sweetish, insidious scent, imperceptible perhaps to any
nerves less strained than his, crept down the stairs and penetrated
into the room.  The voice dwindled into a mere drone and finally sank
away into silence, and Johnson gave a long sigh of relief, for he knew
that the drug had done its work and that, come what might, there should
be no more pain for the sufferer.

But soon the silence became even more trying to him than the cries had
been.  He had no clue now as to what was going on, and his mind swarmed
with horrible possibilities.  He rose and went to the bottom of the
stairs again.  He heard the clink of metal against metal, and the
subdued murmur of the doctors' voices.  Then he heard Mrs. Peyton say
something, in a tone as of fear or expostulation, and again the doctors
murmured together.  For twenty minutes he stood there leaning against
the wall, listening to the occasional rumbles of talk without being
able to catch a word of it.  And then of a sudden there rose out of the
silence the strangest little piping cry, and Mrs. Peyton screamed out
in her delight and the man ran into the parlour and flung himself down
upon the horse-hair sofa, drumming his heels on it in his ecstasy.

But often the great cat Fate lets us go only to clutch us again in a
fiercer grip.  As minute after minute passed and still no sound came
from above save those thin, glutinous cries, Johnson cooled from his
frenzy of joy, and lay breathless with his ears straining.  They were
moving slowly about.  They were talking in subdued tones.  Still minute
after minute passing, and no word from the voice for which he listened.
His nerves were dulled by his night of trouble, and he waited in limp
wretchedness upon his sofa.  There he still sat when the doctors came
down to him--a bedraggled, miserable figure with his face grimy and his
hair unkempt from his long vigil.  He rose as they entered, bracing
himself against the mantelpiece.

"Is she dead?" he asked.

"Doing well," answered the doctor.

And at the words that little conventional spirit which had never known
until that night the capacity for fierce agony which lay within it,
learned for the second time that there were springs of joy also which
it had never tapped before.  His impulse was to fall upon his knees,
but he was shy before the doctors.

"Can I go up?"

"In a few minutes."

"I'm sure, doctor, I'm very--I'm very----" he grew inarticulate.  "Here
are your three guineas, Dr. Pritchard.  I wish they were three hundred."

"So do I," said the senior man, and they laughed as they shook hands.

Johnson opened the shop door for them and heard their talk as they
stood for an instant outside.

"Looked nasty at one time."

"Very glad to have your help."

"Delighted, I'm sure.  Won't you step round and have a cup of coffee?"

"No, thanks.  I'm expecting another case."

The firm step and the dragging one passed away to the right and the
left.  Johnson turned from the door still with that turmoil of joy in
his heart.  He seemed to be making a new start in life.  He felt that
he was a stronger and a deeper man.  Perhaps all this suffering had an
object then.  It might prove to be a blessing both to his wife and to
him.  The very thought was one which he would have been incapable of
conceiving twelve hours before.  He was full of new emotions.  If there
had been a harrowing there had been a planting too.

"Can I come up?" he cried, and then, without waiting for an answer, he
took the steps three at a time.

Mrs. Peyton was standing by a soapy bath with a bundle in her hands.
From under the curve of a brown shawl there looked out at him the
strangest little red face with crumpled features, moist, loose lips,
and eyelids which quivered like a rabbit's nostrils.  The weak neck had
let the head topple over, and it rested upon the shoulder.

"Kiss it, Robert!" cried the grandmother. "Kiss your son!"

But he felt a resentment to the little, red, blinking creature.  He
could not forgive it yet for that long night of misery.  He caught
sight of a white face in the bed and he ran towards it with such love
and pity as his speech could find no words for.

"Thank God it is over!  Lucy, dear, it was dreadful!"

"But I'm so happy now.  I never was so happy in my life."

Her eyes were fixed upon the brown bundle.

"You mustn't talk," said Mrs. Peyton.

"But don't leave me,"  whispered his wife.

So he sat in silence with his hand in hers.  The lamp was burning dim
and the first cold light of dawn was breaking through the window.  The
night had been long and dark but the day was the sweeter and the purer
in consequence.  London was waking up.  The roar began to rise from the
street.  Lives had come and lives had gone, but the great machine was
still working out its dim and tragic destiny.




SWEETHEARTS.

It is hard for the general practitioner who sits among his patients
both morning and evening, and sees them in their homes between, to
steal time for one little daily breath of cleanly air.  To win it he
must slip early from his bed and walk out between shuttered shops when
it is chill but very clear, and all things are sharply outlined, as in
a frost.  It is an hour that has a charm of its own, when, but for a
postman or a milkman, one has the pavement to oneself, and even the
most common thing takes an ever-recurring freshness, as though
causeway, and lamp, and signboard had all wakened to the new day.  Then
even an inland city may seem beautiful, and bear virtue in its
smoke-tainted air.

But it was by the sea that I lived, in a town that was unlovely enough
were it not for its glorious neighbour.  And who cares for the town
when one can sit on the bench at the headland, and look out over the
huge, blue bay, and the yellow scimitar that curves before it.  I loved
it when its great face was freckled with the fishing boats, and I loved
it when the big ships went past, far out, a little hillock of white and
no hull, with topsails curved like a bodice, so stately and demure.
But most of all I loved it when no trace of man marred the majesty of
Nature, and when the sun-bursts slanted down on it from between the
drifting rainclouds.  Then I have seen the further edge draped in the
gauze of the driving rain, with its thin grey shading under the slow
clouds, while my headland was golden, and the sun gleamed upon the
breakers and struck deep through the green waves beyond, showing up the
purple patches where the beds of seaweed are lying.  Such a morning as
that, with the wind in his hair, and the spray on his lips, and the cry
of the eddying gulls in his ear, may send a man back braced afresh to
the reek of a sick-room, and the dead, drab weariness of practice.

It was on such another day that I first saw my old man.  He came to my
bench just as I was leaving it.  My eye must have picked him out even
in a crowded street, for he was a man of large frame and fine presence,
with something of distinction in the set of his lip and the poise of
his head.  He limped up the winding path leaning heavily upon his
stick, as though those great shoulders had become too much at last for
the failing limbs that bore them.  As he approached, my eyes caught
Nature's danger signal, that faint bluish tinge in nose and lip which
tells of a labouring heart.

"The brae is a little trying, sir," said I.  "Speaking  as a physician,
I should say that you would do well to rest here before you go further."

He inclined his head in a stately, old-world fashion, and seated
himself upon the bench.  Seeing that he had no wish to speak I was
silent also, but I could not help watching him out of the corners of my
eyes, for he was such a wonderful survival of the early half of the
century, with his low-crowned, curly-brimmed hat, his black satin tie
which fastened with a buckle at the back, and, above all, his large,
fleshy, clean-shaven face shot with its mesh of wrinkles.  Those eyes,
ere they had grown dim, had looked out from the box-seat of mail
coaches, and had seen the knots of navvies as they toiled on the brown
embankments.  Those lips had smiled over the first numbers of
"Pickwick," and had gossiped of the promising young man who wrote them.
The face itself was a seventy-year almanack, and every seam an entry
upon it where public as well as private sorrow left its trace.  That
pucker on the forehead stood for the Mutiny, perhaps; that line of care
for the Crimean winter, it may be; and that last little sheaf of
wrinkles, as my fancy hoped, for the death of Gordon.  And so, as I
dreamed in my foolish way, the old gentleman with the shining stock was
gone, and it was seventy years of a great nation's life that took shape
before me on the headland in the morning.

But he soon brought me back to earth again.  As he recovered his breath
he took a letter out of his pocket, and, putting on a pair of
horn-rimmed eye-glasses, he read it through very carefully.  Without
any design of playing the spy I could not help observing that it was in
a woman's hand.  When he had finished it he read it again, and then sat
with the corners of his mouth drawn down and his eyes staring vacantly
out over the bay, the most forlorn-looking old gentleman that ever I
have seen.  All that is kindly within me was set stirring by that
wistful face, but I knew that he was in no humour for talk, and so, at
last, with my breakfast and my patients calling me, I left him on the
bench and started for home.

I never gave him another thought until the next morning, when, at the
same hour, he turned up upon the headland, and shared the bench which I
had been accustomed to look upon as my own.  He bowed again before
sitting down, but was no more inclined than formerly to enter into
conversation.  There had been a change in him during the last
twenty-four hours, and all for the worse.  The face seemed more heavy
and more wrinkled, while that ominous venous tinge was more pronounced
as he panted up the hill.  The clean lines of his cheek and chin were
marred by a day's growth of grey stubble, and his large, shapely head
had lost something of the brave carriage which had struck me when first
I glanced at him.  He had a letter there, the same, or another, but
still in a woman's hand, and over this he was moping and mumbling in
his senile fashion, with his brow puckered, and the corners of his
mouth drawn down like those of a fretting child.  So I left him, with a
vague wonder as to who he might be, and why a single spring day should
have wrought such a change upon him.

So interested was I that next morning I was on the look out for him.
Sure enough, at the same hour, I saw him coming up the hill; but very
slowly, with a bent back and a heavy head.  It was shocking to me to
see the change in him as he approached.

"I am afraid that our air does not agree with you, sir," I ventured to
remark.

But it was as though he had no heart for talk.  He tried, as I thought,
to make some fitting reply, but it slurred off into a mumble and
silence.  How bent and weak and old he seemed--ten years older at the
least than when first I had seen him!  It went to my heart to see this
fine old fellow wasting away before my eyes.  There was the eternal
letter which he unfolded with his shaking fingers.  Who was this woman
whose words moved him so?  Some daughter, perhaps, or granddaughter,
who should have been the light of his home instead of----  I smiled to
find how bitter I was growing, and how swiftly I was weaving a romance
round an unshaven old man and his correspondence.  Yet all day he
lingered in my mind, and I had fitful glimpses of those two trembling,
blue-veined, knuckly hands with the paper rustling between them.

I had hardly hoped to see him again.  Another day's decline must, I
thought, hold him to his room, if not to his bed.  Great, then, was my
surprise when, as I approached my bench, I saw that he was already
there.  But as I came up to him I could scarce be sure that it was
indeed the same man.  There were the curly-brimmed hat, and the shining
stock, and the horn glasses, but where were the stoop and the
grey-stubbled, pitiable face?  He was clean-shaven and firm lipped,
with a bright eye and a head that poised itself upon his great
shoulders like an eagle on a rock.  His back was as straight and square
as a grenadier's, and he switched at the pebbles with his stick in his
exuberant vitality.  In the button-hole of his well-brushed black coat
there glinted a golden blossom, and the corner of a dainty red silk
handkerchief lapped over from his breast pocket.  He might have been
the eldest son of the weary creature who had sat there the morning
before.

"Good morning, Sir, good morning!" he cried with a merry waggle of his
cane.

"Good morning!" I answered, "how beautiful the bay is looking."

"Yes, Sir, but you should have seen it just before the sun rose."

"What, have you been here since then?"

"I was here when there was scarce light to see the path."

"You are a very early riser."

"On occasion, sir; on occasion!"  He cocked his eye at me as if to
gauge whether I were worthy of his confidence.  "The fact is, sir, that
my wife is coming back to me to day."

I suppose that my face showed that I did not quite see the force of the
explanation.  My eyes, too, may have given him assurance of sympathy,
for he moved quite close to me and began speaking in a low,
confidential voice, as if the matter were of such weight that even the
sea-gulls must be kept out of our councils.

"Are you a married man, Sir?"

"No, I am not."

"Ah, then you cannot quite understand it.  My wife and I have been
married for nearly fifty years, and we have never been parted, never at
all, until now."

"Was it for long?" I asked.

"Yes, sir.  This is the fourth day.  She had to go to Scotland.  A
matter of duty, you understand, and the doctors would not let me go.
Not that I would have allowed them to stop me, but she was on their
side.  Now, thank God! it is over, and she may be here at any moment."

"Here!"

"Yes, here.  This headland and bench were old friends of ours thirty
years ago.  The people with whom we stay are not, to tell the truth,
very congenial, and we have, little privacy among them.  That is why we
prefer to meet here.  I could not be sure which train would bring her,
but if she had come by the very earliest she would have found me
waiting."

"In that case----" said I, rising.

"No, sir, no," he entreated, "I beg that you will stay.  It does not
weary you, this domestic talk of mine?"

"On the contrary."

"I have been so driven inwards during these few last days! Ah, what a
nightmare it has been! Perhaps it may seem strange to you that an old
fellow like me should feel like this."

"It is charming."

"No credit to me, sir!  There's not a man on this planet but would feel
the same if he had the good fortune to be married to such a woman.
Perhaps, because you see me like this, and hear me speak of our long
life together, you conceive that she is old, too."

He laughed heartily, and his eyes twinkled at the humour of the idea.

"She's one of those women, you know, who have youth in their hearts,
and so it can never be very far from their faces.  To me she's just as
she was when she first took my hand in hers in '45.  A wee little bit
stouter, perhaps, but then, if she had a fault as a girl, it was that
she was a shade too slender.  She was above me in station, you know--I
a clerk, and she the daughter of my employer.  Oh! it was quite a
romance, I give you my word, and I won her; and, somehow, I have never
got over the freshness and the wonder of it.  To think that that sweet,
lovely girl has walked by my side all through life, and that I have
been able----"

He stopped suddenly, and I glanced round at him in surprise.  He was
shaking all over, in every fibre of his great body.  His hands were
clawing at the woodwork, and his feet shuffling on the gravel.  I saw
what it was.  He was trying to rise, but was so excited that he could
not.  I half extended my hand, but a higher courtesy constrained me to
draw it back again and turn my face to the sea.  An instant afterwards
he was up and hurrying down the path.

A woman was coming towards us.  She was quite close before he had seen
her--thirty yards at the utmost.  I know not if she had ever been as he
described her, or whether it was but some ideal which he carried in his
brain.  The person upon whom I looked was tall, it is true, but she was
thick and shapeless, with a ruddy, full-blown face,  and a skirt
grotesquely gathered up.  There was a green ribbon in her hat, which
jarred upon my eyes, and her blouse-like bodice was full and clumsy.
And this was the lovely girl, the ever youthful!  My heart sank as I
thought how little such a woman might appreciate him, how unworthy she
might be of his love.

She came up the path in her solid way, while he staggered along to meet
her.  Then, as they came together, looking discreetly out of the
furthest corner of my eye, I saw that he put out both his hands, while
she, shrinking from a public caress, took one of them in hers and shook
it.  As she did so I saw her face, and I was easy in my mind for my old
man.  God grant that when this hand is shaking, and when this back is
bowed, a woman's eyes may look so into mine.




A PHYSIOLOGIST'S WIFE.

Professor Ainslie Grey had not come down to breakfast at the usual
hour.  The presentation chiming-clock which stood between the
terra-cotta busts of Claude Bernard and of John Hunter upon the
dining-room mantelpiece had rung out the half-hour and the
three-quarters.  Now its golden hand was verging upon the nine, and yet
there were no signs of the master of the house.

It was an unprecedented occurrence.  During the twelve years that she
had kept house for him, his youngest sister had never known him a
second behind his time.  She sat now in front of the high silver
coffee-pot, uncertain whether to order the gong to be resounded or to
wait on in silence.  Either course might be a mistake.  Her brother was
not a man who permitted mistakes.

Miss Ainslie Grey was rather above the middle height, thin, with
peering, puckered eyes, and the rounded shoulders which mark the
bookish woman.  Her face was long and spare, flecked with colour above
the cheek-bones, with a reasonable, thoughtful forehead, and a dash of
absolute obstinacy in her thin lips and prominent chin.  Snow white
cuffs and collar, with a plain dark dress, cut with almost Quaker-like
simplicity, bespoke the primness of her taste.  An ebony cross hung
over her flattened chest.  She sat very upright in her chair, listening
with raised eyebrows, and swinging her eye-glasses backwards and
forwards with a nervous gesture which was peculiar to her.

Suddenly she gave a sharp, satisfied jerk of the head, and began to
pour out the coffee.  From outside there came the dull thudding sound
of heavy feet upon thick carpet.  The door swung open, and the
Professor entered with a quick, nervous step.  He nodded to his sister,
and seating himself at the other side of the table, began to open the
small pile of letters which lay beside his plate.

Professor Ainslie Grey was at that time forty-three years of
age--nearly twelve years older than his sister.  His career had been a
brilliant one.  At Edinburgh, at Cambridge, and at Vienna he had laid
the foundations of his great reputation, both in physiology and in
zoology.

His pamphlet, On the Mesoblastic Origin of Excitomotor Nerve Roots, had
won him his fellowship of the Royal Society; and his researches, Upon
the Nature of Bathybius, with some Remarks upon Lithococci, had been
translated into at least three European languages.  He had been
referred to by one of the greatest living authorities as being the very
type and embodiment of all that was best in modern science.  No wonder,
then, that when the commercial city of Birchespool decided to create a
medical school, they were only too glad to confer the chair of
physiology upon Mr. Ainslie Grey.  They valued him the more from the
conviction that their class was only one step in his upward journey,
and that the first vacancy would remove him to some more illustrious
seat of learning.

In person he was not unlike his sister.  The same eyes, the same
contour, the same intellectual forehead.  His lips, however, were
firmer, and his long, thin, lower jaw was sharper and more decided.  He
ran his finger and thumb down it from time to time, as he glanced over
his letters.

"Those maids are very noisy," he remarked, as a clack of tongues
sounded in the distance.

"It is Sarah," said his sister; "I shall speak about it."

She had handed over his coffee-cup, and was sipping at her own,
glancing furtively through her narrowed lids at the austere face of her
brother.

"The first great advance of the human race," said the Professor, "was
when, by the development of their left frontal convolutions, they
attained the power of speech.  Their second advance was when they
learned to control that power.  Woman has not yet attained the second
stage."

He half closed his eyes as he spoke, and thrust his chin forward, but
as he ceased he had a trick of suddenly opening both eyes very wide and
staring sternly at his interlocutor.

"I am not garrulous, John," said his sister.

"No, Ada; in many respects you approach the superior or male type."

The Professor bowed over his egg with the manner of one who utters a
courtly compliment; but the lady pouted, and gave an impatient little
shrug of her shoulders.

"You were late this morning, John," she remarked, after a pause.

"Yes, Ada; I slept badly.  Some little cerebral congestion, no doubt
due to over-stimulation of the centers of thought.  I have been a
little disturbed in my mind."

His sister stared across at him in astonishment.  The Professor's
mental processes had hitherto been as regular as his habits.  Twelve
years' continual intercourse had taught her that he lived in a serene
and rarefied atmosphere of scientific calm, high above the petty
emotions which affect humbler minds.

"You are surprised, Ada," he remarked.  "Well, I cannot wonder at it.
I should have been surprised myself if I had been told that I was so
sensitive to vascular influences.  For, after all, all disturbances are
vascular if you probe them deep enough.  I am thinking of getting
married."

"Not Mrs. O'James" cried Ada Grey, laying down her egg-spoon.

"My dear, you have the feminine quality of receptivity very remarkably
developed.  Mrs. O'James is the lady in question."

"But you know so little of her.  The Esdailes themselves know so
little.  She is really only an acquaintance, although she is staying at
The Lindens.  Would it not be wise to speak to Mrs. Esdaile first,
John?"

"I do not think, Ada, that Mrs. Esdaile is at all likely to say
anything which would materially affect my course of action.  I have
given the matter due consideration.  The scientific mind is slow at
arriving at conclusions, but having once formed them, it is not prone
to change.  Matrimony is the natural condition of the human race.  I
have, as you know, been so engaged in academical and other work, that I
have had no time to devote to merely personal questions.  It is
different now, and I see no valid reason why I should forego this
opportunity of seeking a suitable helpmate."

"And you are engaged?"

"Hardly that, Ada.  I ventured yesterday to indicate to the lady that I
was prepared to submit to the common lot of humanity.  I shall wait
upon her after my morning lecture, and learn how far my proposals meet
with her acquiescence.  But you frown, Ada!"

His sister started, and made an effort to conceal her expression of
annoyance.  She even stammered out some few words of congratulation,
but a vacant look had come into her brother's eyes, and he was
evidently not listening to her.

"I am sure, John, that I wish you the happiness which you deserve.  If
I hesitated at all, it is because I know how much is at stake, and
because the thing is so sudden, so unexpected."  Her thin white hand
stole up to the black cross upon her bosom.  "These are moments when we
need guidance, John.  If I could persuade you to turn to spiritual----"

The Professor waved the suggestion away with a deprecating hand.

"It is useless to reopen that question," he said.  "We cannot argue
upon it.  You assume more than I can grant.  I am forced to dispute
your premises.  We have no common basis."

His sister sighed.

"You have no faith," she said.

"I have faith in those great evolutionary forces which are leading the
human race to some unknown but elevated goal."

"You believe in nothing."

"On the contrary, my dear Ada, I believe in the differentiation of
protoplasm."

She shook her head sadly.  It was the one subject upon which she
ventured to dispute her brother's infallibility.

"This is rather beside the question," remarked the Professor, folding
up his napkin.  "If I am not mistaken, there is some possibility of
another matrimonial event occurring in the family.  Eh, Ada?  What!"

His small eyes glittered with sly facetiousness as he shot a twinkle at
his sister.  She sat very stiff, and traced patterns upon the cloth
with the sugar-tongs.

"Dr. James M'Murdo O'Brien----" said the Professor, sonorously.

"Don't, John, don't!" cried Miss Ainslie Grey.

"Dr. James M'Murdo O'Brien," continued her brother inexorably, "is a
man who has already made his mark upon the science of the day.  He is
my first and my most distinguished pupil.  I assure you, Ada, that his
'Remarks upon the Bile-Pigments, with special reference to Urobilin,'
is likely to live as a classic.  It is not too much to say that he has
revolutionised our views about urobilin."

He paused, but his sister sat silent, with bent head and flushed
cheeks.  The little ebony cross rose and fell with her hurried
breathings.

"Dr. James M'Murdo O'Brien has, as you know, the offer of the
physiological chair at Melbourne.  He has been in Australia five years,
and has a brilliant future before him.  To-day he leaves us for
Edinburgh, and in two months' time, he goes out to take over his new
duties.  You know his feeling towards you.  It rests with you as to
whether he goes out alone.  Speaking for myself, I cannot imagine any
higher mission for a woman of culture than to go through life in the
company of a man who is capable of such a research as that which Dr.
James M'Murdo O'Brien has brought to a successful conclusion."

"He has not spoken to me," murmured the lady.

"Ah, there are signs which are more subtle than speech," said her
brother, wagging his head.  "But you are pale.  Your vasomotor system
is excited.  Your arterioles have contracted.  Let me entreat you to
compose yourself.  I think I hear the carriage.  I fancy that you may
have a visitor this morning, Ada.  You will excuse me now."

With a quick glance at the clock he strode off into the hall, and
within a few minutes he was rattling in his quiet, well-appointed
brougham through the brick-lined streets of Birchespool.

His lecture over, Professor Ainslie Grey paid a visit to his
laboratory, where he adjusted several scientific instruments, made a
note as to the progress of three separate infusions of bacteria, cut
half-a-dozen sections with a microtome, and finally resolved the
difficulties of seven different gentlemen, who were pursuing researches
in as many separate lines of inquiry.  Having thus conscientiously and
methodically completed the routine of his duties, he returned to his
carriage and ordered the coachman to drive him to The Lindens.  His
face as he drove was cold and impassive, but he drew his fingers from
time to time down his prominent chin with a jerky, twitchy movement.

The Lindens was an old-fashioned, ivy-clad house which had once been in
the country, but was now caught in the long, red-brick feelers of the
growing city.  It still stood back from the road in the privacy of its
own grounds.  A winding path, lined with laurel bushes, led to the
arched and porticoed entrance.  To the right was a lawn, and at the far
side, under the shadow of a hawthorn, a lady sat in a garden-chair with
a book in her hands.  At the click of the gate she started, and the
Professor, catching sight of her, turned away from the door, and strode
in her direction.

"What! won't you go in and see Mrs. Esdaile?" she asked, sweeping out
from under the shadow of the hawthorn.

She was a small woman, strongly feminine, from the rich coils of her
light-coloured hair to the dainty garden slipper which peeped from
under her cream-tinted dress.  One tiny well-gloved hand was
outstretched in greeting, while the other pressed a thick,
green-covered volume against her side.  Her decision and quick, tactful
manner bespoke the mature woman of the world; but her upraised face had
preserved a girlish and even infantile expression of innocence in its
large, fearless, grey eyes, and sensitive, humorous mouth.  Mrs.
O'James was a widow, and she was two-and-thirty years of age; but
neither fact could have been deduced from her appearance.

"You will surely go in and see Mrs. Esdaile," she repeated, glancing up
at him with eyes which had in them something between a challenge and a
caress.

"I did not come to see Mrs. Esdaile," he answered, with no relaxation
of his cold and grave manner; "I came to see you."

"I am sure I should be highly honoured," she said, with just the
slightest little touch of brogue in her accent.  "What are the students
to do without their Professor?"

"I have already completed my academic duties.  Take my arm, and we
shall walk in the sunshine.  Surely we cannot wonder that Eastern
people should have made a deity of the sun.  It is the great beneficent
force of Nature--man's ally against cold, sterility, and all that is
abhorrent to him.  What were you reading?"

"Hale's Matter and Life."

The Professor raised his thick eyebrows.

"Hale!" he said, and then again in a kind of whisper, "Hale!"

"You differ from him?" she asked.

"It is not I who differ from him.  I am only a monad--a thing of no
moment.  The whole tendency of the highest plane of modern thought
differs from him.  He defends the indefensible.  He is an excellent
observer, but a feeble reasoner.  I should not recommend you to found
your conclusions upon Hale."

"I must read Nature's Chronicle to counteract his pernicious
influence," said Mrs. O'James, with a soft, cooing laugh.

Nature's Chronicle was one of the many books in which Professor Ainslie
Grey had enforced the negative doctrines of scientific agnosticism.

"It is a faulty work," said he; "I cannot recommend it.  I would rather
refer you to the standard writings of some of my older and more
eloquent colleagues."

There was a pause in their talk as they paced up and down on the green,
velvet-like lawn in the genial sunshine.

"Have you thought at all," he asked at last, "of the matter upon which
I spoke to you last night?"

She said nothing, but walked by his side with her eyes averted and her
face aslant.

"I would not hurry you unduly," he continued.  "I know that it is a
matter which can scarcely be decided off-hand.  In my own case, it cost
me some thought before I ventured to make the suggestion.  I am not an
emotional man, but I am conscious in your presence of the great
evolutionary instinct which makes either sex the complement of the
other."

"You believe in love, then?" she asked, with a twinkling, upward glance.

"I am forced to."

"And yet you can deny the soul?"

"How far these questions are psychic and how far material is still sub
judice," said the Professor, with an air of toleration.  "Protoplasm
may prove to be the physical basis of love as well as of life."

"How inflexible you are!" she exclaimed; "you would draw love down to
the level of physics."

"Or draw physics up to the level of love."

"Come, that is much better," she cried, with her sympathetic laugh.
"That is really very pretty, and puts science in quite a delightful
light."

Her eyes sparkled, and she tossed her chin with the pretty, wilful air
of a woman who is mistress of the situation.

"I have reason to believe," said the Professor, "that my position here
will prove to be only a stepping-stone to some wider scene of
scientific activity.  Yet, even here, my chair brings me in some
fifteen hundred pounds a year, which is supplemented by a few hundreds
from my books.  I should therefore be in a position to provide you with
those comforts to which you are accustomed.  So much for my pecuniary
position.  As to my constitution, it has always been sound.  I have
never suffered from any illness in my life, save fleeting attacks of
cephalalgia, the result of too prolonged a stimulation of the centres
of cerebration.  My father and mother had no sign of any morbid
diathesis, but I will not conceal from you that my grandfather was
afflicted with podagra."

Mrs. O'James looked startled.

"Is that very serious?" she asked.

"It is gout," said the Professor.

"Oh, is that all?  It sounded much worse than that."

"It is a grave taint, but I trust that I shall not be a victim to
atavism.  I have laid these facts before you because they are factors
which cannot be overlooked in forming your decision.  May I ask now
whether you see your way to accepting my proposal?"

He paused in his walk, and looked earnestly and expectantly down at her.

A struggle was evidently going on in her mind.  Her eyes were cast
down, her little slipper tapped the lawn, and her fingers played
nervously with her chatelain.  Suddenly, with a sharp, quick gesture
which had in it something of <i>abandon</i> and recklessness, she held out her
hand to her companion.

"I accept," she said.

They were standing under the shadow of the hawthorn.  He stooped
gravely down, and kissed her glove-covered fingers.

"I trust that you may never have cause to regret your decision," he
said.

"I trust that you never may," she cried, with a heaving breast.

There were tears in her eyes, and her lips twitched with some strong
emotion.

"Come into the sunshine again," said he.  "It is the great restorative.
Your nerves are shaken.  Some little congestion of the medulla and
pons.  It is always instructive to reduce psychic or emotional
conditions to their physical equivalents.  You feel that your anchor is
still firm in a bottom of ascertained fact."

"But it is so dreadfully unromantic," said Mrs. O'James, with her old
twinkle.

"Romance is the offspring of imagination and of ignorance.  Where
science throws her calm, clear light there is happily no room for
romance."

"But is not love romance?" she asked.

"Not at all.  Love has been taken away from the poets, and has been
brought within the domain of true science.  It may prove to be one of
the great cosmic elementary forces.  When the atom of hydrogen draws
the atom of chlorine towards it to form the perfected molecule of
hydrochloric acid, the force which it exerts may be intrinsically
similar to that which draws me to you.  Attraction and repulsion appear
to be the primary forces.  This is attraction."

"And here is repulsion," said Mrs. O'James, as a stout, florid lady
came sweeping across the lawn in their direction.  "So glad you have
come out, Mrs. Esdaile!  Here is Professor Grey."

"How do you do, Professor?" said the lady, with some little pomposity
of manner.  "You were very wise to stay out here on so lovely a day.
Is it not heavenly?"

"It is certainly very fine weather," the Professor answered.

"Listen to the wind sighing in the trees!" cried Mrs. Esdaile, holding
up one finger.  "It is Nature's lullaby.  Could you not imagine it,
Professor Grey, to be the whisperings of angels?"

"The idea had not occurred to me, madam."

"Ah, Professor, I have always the same complaint against you.  A want
of rapport with the deeper meanings of nature.  Shall I say a want of
imagination.  You do not feel an emotional thrill at the singing of
that thrush?"

"I confess that I am not conscious of one, Mrs. Esdaile."

"Or at the delicate tint of that background of leaves?  See the rich
greens!"

"Chlorophyll," murmured the Professor.

"Science is so hopelessly prosaic.  It dissects and labels, and loses
sight of the great things in its attention to the little ones.  You
have a poor opinion of woman's intellect, Professor Grey.  I think that
I have heard you say so."

"It is a question of avoirdupois," said the Professor, closing his eyes
and shrugging his shoulders.  "The female cerebrum averages two ounces
less in weight than the male.  No doubt there are exceptions.  Nature
is always elastic."

"But the heaviest thing is not always the strongest," said Mrs.
O'James, laughing.  "Isn't there a law of compensation in science?  May
we not hope to make up in quality for what we lack in quantity?"

"I think not," remarked the Professor, gravely.  "But there is your
luncheon-gong.  No, thank you, Mrs. Esdaile, I cannot stay.  My
carriage is waiting.  Good-bye.  Good-bye, Mrs. O'James."

He raised his hat and stalked slowly away among the laurel bushes.

"He has no taste," said Mrs. Esdaile--"no eye for beauty."

"On the contrary," Mrs. O'James answered, with a saucy little jerk of
the chin.  "He has just asked me to be his wife."


As Professor Ainslie Grey ascended the steps of his house, the
hall-door opened and a dapper gentleman stepped briskly out.  He was
somewhat sallow in the face, with dark, beady eyes, and a short, black
beard with an aggressive bristle.  Thought and work had left their
traces upon his face, but he moved with the brisk activity of a man who
had not yet bade good-bye to his youth.

"I'm in luck's way," he cried.  "I wanted to see you."

"Then come back into the library," said the Professor; "you must stay
and have lunch with us."

The two men entered the hall, and the Professor led the way into his
private sanctum.  He motioned his companion into an arm-chair.

"I trust that you have been successful, O'Brien," said he.  "I should
be loath to exercise any undue pressure upon my sister Ada; but I have
given her to understand that there is no one whom I should prefer for a
brother-in-law to my most brilliant scholar, the author of Some Remarks
upon the Bile-Pigments, with special reference to Urobilin."

"You are very kind, Professor Grey--you have always been very kind,"
said the other.  "I approached Miss Grey upon the subject; she did not
say No."

"She said Yes, then?"

"No; she proposed to leave the matter open until my return from
Edinburgh.  I go to-day, as you know, and I hope to commence my
research to-morrow."

"On the comparative anatomy of the vermiform appendix, by James M'Murdo
O'Brien," said the Professor, sonorously.  "It is a glorious subject--a
subject which lies at the very root of evolutionary philosophy."

"Ah! she is the dearest girl," cried O'Brien, with a sudden little
spurt of Celtic enthusiasm--"she is the soul of truth and of honour."

"The vermiform appendix----" began the Professor.

"She is an angel from heaven," interrupted the other.  "I fear that it
is my advocacy of scientific freedom in religious thought which stands
in my way with her."

"You must not truckle upon that point.  You must be true to your
convictions; let there be no compromise there."

"My reason is true to agnosticism, and yet I am conscious of a void--a
vacuum.  I had feelings at the old church at home between the scent of
the incense and the roll of the organ, such as I have never experienced
in the laboratory or the lecture-room."

"Sensuous-purely sensuous," said the Professor, rubbing his chin.
"Vague hereditary tendencies stirred into life by the stimulation of
the nasal and auditory nerves."

"Maybe so, maybe so," the younger man answered thoughtfully.  "But this
was not what I wished to speak to you about.  Before I enter your
family, your sister and you have a claim to know all that I can tell
you about my career.  Of my worldly prospects I have already spoken to
you.  There is only one point which I have omitted to mention.  I am a
widower."

The Professor raised his eyebrows.

"This is news indeed," said he.

"I married shortly after my arrival in Australia.  Miss Thurston was
her name.  I met her in society.  It was a most unhappy match."

Some painful emotion possessed him.  His quick, expressive features
quivered, and his white hands tightened upon the arms of the chair.
The Professor turned away towards the window.

"You are the best judge," he remarked "but I should not think that it
was necessary to go into details."

"You have a right to know everything--you and Miss Grey.  It is not a
matter on which I can well speak to her direct.  Poor Jinny was the
best of women, but she was open to flattery, and liable to be misled by
designing persons.  She was untrue to me, Grey.  It is a hard thing to
say of the dead, but she was untrue to me.  She fled to Auckland with a
man whom she had known before her marriage.  The brig which carried
them foundered, and not a soul was saved."

"This is very painful, O'Brien," said the Professor, with a deprecatory
motion of his hand.  "I cannot see, however, how it affects your
relation to my sister."

"I have eased my conscience," said O'Brien, rising from his chair; "I
have told you all that there is to tell.  I should not like the story
to reach you through any lips but my own."

"You are right, O'Brien.  Your action has been most honourable and
considerate.  But you are not to blame in the matter, save that perhaps
you showed a little precipitancy in choosing a life-partner without due
care and inquiry."

O'Brien drew his hand across his eyes.

"Poor girl!" he cried.  "God help me, I love her still!  But I must go."

"You will lunch with us?"

"No, Professor; I have my packing still to do.  I have already bade
Miss Grey adieu.  In two months I shall see you again."

"You will probably find me a married man."

"Married!"

"Yes, I have been thinking of it."

"My dear Professor, let me congratulate you with all my heart.  I had
no idea.  Who is the lady?"

"Mrs. O'James is her name--a widow of the same nationality as yourself.
But to return to matters of importance, I should be very happy to see
the proofs of your paper upon the vermiform appendix.  I may be able to
furnish you with material for a footnote or two."

"Your assistance will be invaluable to me," said O'Brien, with
enthusiasm, and the two men parted in the hall.  The Professor walked
back into the dining-room, where his sister was already seated at the
luncheon-table.

"I shall be married at the registrar's," he remarked; "I should
strongly recommend you to do the same."

Professor Ainslie Grey was as good as his word.  A fortnight's
cessation of his classes gave him an opportunity which was too good to
let pass.  Mrs. O'James was an orphan, without relations and almost
without friends in the country.  There was no obstacle in the way of a
speedy wedding.  They were married, accordingly, in the quietest manner
possible, and went off to Cambridge together, where the Professor and
his charming wife were present at several academic observances, and
varied the routine of their honeymoon by incursions into biological
laboratories and medical libraries.  Scientific friends were loud in
their congratulations, not only upon Mrs. Grey's beauty, but upon the
unusual quickness and intelligence which she displayed in discussing
physiological questions.  The Professor was himself astonished at the
accuracy of her information.  "You have a remarkable range of knowledge
for a woman, Jeannette," he remarked upon more than one occasion.  He
was even prepared to admit that her cerebrum might be of the normal
weight.

One foggy, drizzling morning they returned to Birchespool, for the next
day would re-open the session, and Professor Ainslie Grey prided
himself upon having never once in his life failed to appear in his
lecture-room at the very stroke of the hour.  Miss Ada Grey welcomed
them with a constrained cordiality, and handed over the keys of office
to the new mistress.  Mrs. Grey pressed her warmly to remain, but she
explained that she had already accepted an invitation which would
engage her for some months.  The same evening she departed for the
south of England.

A couple of days later the maid carried a card just after breakfast
into the library where the Professor sat revising his morning lecture.
It announced the re-arrival of Dr. James M'Murdo O'Brien.  Their
meeting was effusively genial on the part of the younger man, and
coldly precise on that of his former teacher.

"You see there have been changes," said the Professor.

"So I heard.  Miss Grey told me in her letters, and I read the notice
in the British Medical Journal.  So it's really married you are.  How
quickly and quietly you have managed it all!"

"I am constitutionally averse to anything in the nature of show or
ceremony.  My wife is a sensible woman--I may even go the length of
saying that, for a woman, she is abnormally sensible.  She quite agreed
with me in the course which I have adopted."

"And your research on Vallisneria?"

"This matrimonial incident has  interrupted  it, but I have resumed my
classes, and we shall soon be quite in harness again."

"I must see Miss Grey before I leave England.  We have corresponded,
and I think that all will be well.  She must come out with me.  I don't
think I could go without her."

The Professor shook his head.

"Your nature is not so weak as you pretend," he said.  "Questions of
this sort are, after all, quite subordinate to the great duties of
life."

O'Brien smiled.

"You would have me take out my Celtic soul and put in a Saxon one," he
said.  "Either my brain is too small or my heart is too big.  But when
may I call and pay my respects to Mrs. Grey?  Will she be at home this
afternoon?"

"She is at home now.  Come into the morning-room.  She will be glad to
make your acquaintance."

They walked across the linoleum-paved hall.  The Professor opened the
door of the room, and walked in, followed by his friend.  Mrs. Grey was
sitting in a basket-chair by the window, light and fairy-like in a
loose-flowing, pink morning-gown.  Seeing a visitor, she rose and swept
towards them.  The Professor heard a dull thud behind him.  O'Brien had
fallen back into a chair, with his hand pressed tight to his side.

"Jinny!" he gasped--"Jinny!"

Mrs. Grey stopped dead in her advance, and stared at him with a face
from which every expression had been struck out, save one of
astonishment and horror.  Then with a sharp intaking of the breath she
reeled, and would have fallen had the Professor not thrown his long,
nervous arm round her.

"Try this sofa," said he.

She sank back among the cushions with the same white, cold, dead look
upon her face.  The Professor stood with his back to the empty
fireplace and glanced from the one to the other.

"So, O'Brien," he said at last, "you have already made the acquaintance
of my wife!"

"Your wife," cried his friend hoarsely.  "She is no wife of yours.  God
help me, she is <i>my</i> wife."

The Professor stood rigidly upon the hearthrug.  His long, thin fingers
were intertwined, and his head sunk a little forward.  His two
companions had eyes only for each other.

"Jinny!" said he.

"James!"

"How could you leave me so, Jinny?  How could you have the heart to do
it?  I thought you were dead.  I mourned for your death--ay, and you
have made me mourn for you living.  You have withered my life."

She made no answer, but lay back among her cushions with her eyes still
fixed upon him.

"Why do you not speak?"

"Because you are right, James.  I <i>have</i> treated you cruelly--shamefully.
But it is not as bad as you think."

"You fled with De Horta."

"No, I did not.  At the last moment my better nature prevailed.  He
went alone.  But I was ashamed to come back after what I had written to
you.  I could not face you.  I took passage alone to England under a
new name, and here I have lived ever since.  It seemed to me that I was
beginning life again.  I knew that you thought I was drowned.  Who
could have dreamed that fate would throw us together again!  When the
Professor asked me----"

She stopped and gave a gasp for breath.

"You are faint,"  said the Professor--"keep the head low; it aids the
cerebral circulation."  He flattened down the cushion.  "I am sorry to
leave you, O'Brien; but I have my class duties to look to.  Possibly I
may find you here when I return."

With a grim and rigid face he strode out of the room.  Not one of the
three hundred students who listened to his lecture saw any change in
his manner and appearance, or could have guessed that the austere
gentleman in front of them had found out at last how hard it is to rise
above one's humanity.  The lecture over, he performed his routine
duties in the laboratory, and then drove back to his own house.  He did
not enter by the front door, but passed through the garden to the
folding glass casement which led out of the morning-room.  As he
approached he heard his wife's voice and O'Brien's in loud and animated
talk.  He paused among the rose-bushes, uncertain whether to interrupt
them or no.  Nothing was further from his nature than play the
eavesdropper; but as he stood, still hesitating, words fell upon his
ear which struck him rigid and motionless.

"You are still my wife, Jinny," said O'Brien; "I forgive you from the
bottom of my heart.  I love you, and I have never ceased to love you,
though you had forgotten me."

"No, James, my heart was always in Melbourne.  I have always been
yours.  I thought that it was better for you that I should seem to be
dead."

"You must choose between us now, Jinny.  If you determine to remain
here, I shall not open my lips.  There shall be no scandal.  If, on the
other hand, you come with me, it's little I care about the world's
opinion.  Perhaps I am as much to blame as you.  I thought too much of
my work and too little of my wife."

The Professor heard the cooing, caressing laugh which he knew so well.

"I shall go with you, James," she said.

"And the Professor----?"

"The poor Professor!  But he will not mind much, James; he has no
heart."

"We must tell him our resolution."

"There is no need," said Professor Ainslie Grey, stepping in through
the open casement.  "I have overheard the latter part of your
conversation.  I hesitated to interrupt you before you came to a
conclusion."

O'Brien stretched out his hand and took that of the woman.  They stood
together with the sunshine on their faces.  The Professor paused at the
casement with his hands behind his back, and his long black shadow fell
between them.

"You have come to a wise decision," said he.  "Go back to Australia
together, and let what has passed be blotted out of your lives."

"But you--you----" stammered O'Brien.

The Professor waved his hand.

"Never trouble about me," he said.

The woman gave a gasping cry.

"What can I do or say?" she wailed.  "How could I have foreseen this?
I thought my old life was dead.  But it has come back again, with all
its hopes and its desires.  What can I say to you, Ainslie?  I have
brought shame and disgrace upon a worthy man.  I have blasted your
life.  How you must hate and loathe me!  I wish to God that I had never
been born!"

"I neither hate nor loathe you, Jeannette," said the Professor,
quietly.  "You are wrong in regretting your birth, for you have a
worthy mission before you in aiding the life-work of a man who has
shown himself capable of the highest order of scientific research.  I
cannot with justice blame you personally for what has occurred.  How
far the individual monad is to be held responsible for hereditary and
engrained tendencies, is a question upon which science has not yet said
her last word."

He stood with his finger-tips touching, and his body inclined as one
who is gravely expounding a difficult and impersonal subject.  O'Brien
had stepped forward to say something, but the other's attitude and
manner froze the words upon his lips.  Condolence or sympathy would be
an impertinence to one who could so easily merge his private griefs in
broad questions of abstract philosophy.

"It is needless to prolong the situation," the Professor continued, in
the same measured tones.  "My brougham stands at the door.  I beg that
you will use it as your own.  Perhaps it would be as well that you
should leave the town without unnecessary delay.  Your things,
Jeannette, shall be forwarded."

O'Brien hesitated with a hanging head.

"I hardly dare offer you my hand," he said.

"On the contrary.  I think that of the three of us you come best out of
the affair.  You have nothing to be ashamed of."

"Your sister----"

"I shall see that the matter is put to her in its true light.
Good-bye!  Let me have a copy of your recent research.  Good-bye,
Jeannette!"

"Good-bye!"

Their hands met, and for one short moment their eyes also.  It was only
a glance, but for the first and last time the woman's intuition cast a
light for itself into the dark places of a strong man's soul.  She gave
a little gasp, and her other hand rested for an instant, as white and
as light as thistle-down, upon his shoulder.

"James, James!" she cried.  "Don't you see that he is stricken to the
heart?"

He turned her quietly away from him.

"I am not an emotional man," he said. "I have my duties--my research on
Vallisneria.  The brougham is there.  Your cloak is in the hall.  Tell
John where you wish to be driven.  He will bring you anything you need.
Now go."

His last two words were so sudden, so volcanic, in such contrast to his
measured voice and mask-like face, that they swept the two away from
him.  He closed the door behind them and paced slowly up and down the
room.  Then he passed into the library and looked out over the wire
blind.  The carriage was rolling away.  He caught a last glimpse of the
woman who had been his wife.  He saw the feminine droop of her head,
and the curve of her beautiful throat.

Under some foolish, aimless impulse, he took a few quick steps towards
the door.  Then he turned, and throwing himself into his study-chair he
plunged back into his work.


There was little scandal about this singular domestic incident.  The
Professor had few personal friends, and seldom went into society.  His
marriage had been so quiet that most of his colleagues had never ceased
to regard him as a bachelor.  Mrs. Esdaile and a few others might talk,
but their field for gossip was limited, for they could only guess
vaguely at the cause of this sudden separation.

The Professor was as punctual as ever at his classes, and as zealous in
directing the laboratory work of those who studied under him.  His own
private researches were pushed on with feverish energy.  It was no
uncommon thing for his servants, when they came down of a morning, to
hear the shrill scratchings of his tireless pen, or to meet him on the
staircase as he ascended, grey and silent, to his room.  In vain his
friends assured him that such a life must undermine his health.  He
lengthened his hours until day and night were one long, ceaseless task.

Gradually under this discipline a change came over his appearance.  His
features, always inclined to gauntness, became even sharper and more
pronounced.  There were deep lines about his temples and across his
brow.  His cheek was sunken and his complexion bloodless.  His knees
gave under him when he walked; and once when passing out of his
lecture-room he fell and had to be assisted to his carriage.

This was just before the end of the session and soon after the holidays
commenced the professors who still remained in Birchespool were shocked
to hear that their brother of the chair of physiology had sunk so low
that no hopes could be entertained of his recovery.  Two eminent
physicians had consulted over his case without being able to give a
name to the affection from which he suffered.  A steadily decreasing
vitality appeared to be the only symptom--a bodily weakness which left
the mind unclouded.  He was much interested himself in his own case,
and made notes of his subjective sensations as an aid to diagnosis.  Of
his approaching end he spoke in his usual unemotional and somewhat
pedantic fashion.  "It is the assertion," he said, "of the liberty of
the individual cell as opposed to the cell-commune.  It is the
dissolution of a co-operative society.  The process is one of great
interest."

And so one grey morning his co-operative society dissolved.  Very
quietly and softly he sank into his eternal sleep.  His two physicians
felt some slight embarrassment when called upon to fill in his
certificate.

"It is difficult to give it a name," said one.

"Very," said the other.

"If he were not such an unemotional man, I should have said that he had
died from some sudden nervous shock--from, in fact, what the vulgar
would call a broken heart."

"I don't think poor Grey was that sort of a man at all."

"Let us call it cardiac, anyhow," said the older physician.

So they did so.




THE CASE OF LADY SANNOX.

The relations between Douglas Stone and the notorious Lady Sannox were
very well known both among the fashionable circles of which she was a
brilliant member, and the scientific bodies which numbered him among
their most illustrious confreres.  There was naturally, therefore, a
very widespread interest when it was announced one morning that the
lady had absolutely and for ever taken the veil, and that the world
would see her no more.  When, at the very tail of this rumour, there
came the assurance that the celebrated operating surgeon, the man of
steel nerves, had been found in the morning by his valet, seated on one
side of his bed, smiling pleasantly upon the universe, with both legs
jammed into one side of his breeches and his great brain about as
valuable as a cap full of porridge, the matter was strong enough to
give quite a little thrill of interest to folk who had never hoped that
their jaded nerves were capable of such a sensation.

Douglas Stone in his prime was one of the most remarkable men in
England.  Indeed, he could hardly be said to have ever reached his
prime, for he was but nine-and-thirty at the time of this little
incident.  Those who knew him best were aware that, famous as he was as
a surgeon, he might have succeeded with even greater rapidity in any of
a dozen lines of life.  He could have cut his way to fame as a soldier,
struggled to it as an explorer, bullied for it in the courts, or built
it out of stone and iron as an engineer.  He was born to be great, for
he could plan what another man dare not do, and he could do what
another man dare not plan.  In surgery none could follow him.  His
nerve, his judgment, his intuition, were things apart.  Again and again
his knife cut away death, but grazed the very springs of life in doing
it, until his assistants were as white as the patient.  His energy, his
audacity, his full-blooded self-confidence--does not the memory of them
still linger to the south of Marylebone Road and the north of Oxford
Street?

His vices were as magnificent as his virtues, and infinitely more
picturesque.  Large as was his income, and it was the third largest of
all professional men in London, it was far beneath the luxury of his
living.  Deep in his complex nature lay a rich vein of sensualism, at
the sport of which he placed all the prizes of his life.  The eye, the
ear, the touch, the palate--all were his masters.  The bouquet of old
vintages, the scent of rare exotics, the curves and tints of the
daintiest potteries of Europe--it was to these that the quick-running
stream of gold was transformed.  And then there came his sudden mad
passion for Lady Sannox, when a single interview with two challenging
glances and a whispered word set him ablaze.  She was the loveliest
woman in London, and the only one to him.  He was one of the handsomest
men in London, but not the only one to her.  She had a liking for new
experiences, and was gracious to most men who wooed her.  It may have
been cause or it may have been effect that Lord Sannox looked fifty,
though he was but six-and-thirty.

He was a quiet, silent, neutral-tinted man, this lord, with thin lips
and heavy eyelids, much given to gardening, and full of home-like
habits.  He had at one time been fond of acting, had even rented a
theatre in London, and on its boards had first seen Miss Marion Dawson,
to whom he had offered his hand, his title, and the third of a county.
Since his marriage this early hobby had become distasteful to him.
Even in private theatricals it was no longer possible to persuade him
to exercise the talent which he had often shown that he possessed.  He
was happier with a spud and a watering-can among his orchids and
chrysanthemums.

It was quite an interesting problem whether he was absolutely devoid of
sense, or miserably wanting in spirit.  Did he know his lady's ways and
condone them, or was he a mere blind, doting fool?  It was a point to
be discussed over the teacups in snug little drawing-rooms, or with the
aid of a cigar in the bow windows of clubs.  Bitter and plain were the
comments among men upon his conduct.  There was but one who had a good
word to say for him, and he was the most silent member in the
smoking-room.  He had seen him break in a horse at the university, and
it seemed to have left an impression upon his mind.

But when Douglas Stone became the favourite, all doubts as to Lord
Sannox's knowledge or ignorance were set for ever at rest.  There, was
no subterfuge about Stone.  In his high-handed, impetuous fashion, he
set all caution and discretion at defiance.  The scandal became
notorious.  A learned body intimated that his name had been struck from
the list of its vice-presidents.  Two friends implored him to consider
his professional credit.  He cursed them all three, and spent forty
guineas on a bangle to take with him to the lady.  He was at her house
every evening, and she drove in his carriage in the afternoons.  There
was not an attempt on either side to conceal their relations; but there
came at last a little incident to interrupt them.

It was a dismal winter's night, very cold and gusty, with the wind
whooping in the chimneys and blustering against the window-panes.  A
thin spatter of rain tinkled on the glass with each fresh sough of the
gale, drowning for the instant the dull gurgle and drip from the eves.
Douglas Stone had finished his dinner, and sat by his fire in the
study, a glass of rich port upon the malachite table at his elbow.  As
he raised it to his lips, he held it up against the lamplight, and
watched with the eye of a connoisseur the tiny scales of beeswing which
floated in its rich ruby depths.  The fire, as it spurted up, threw
fitful lights upon his bold, clear-cut face, with its widely-opened
grey eyes, its thick and yet firm lips, and the deep, square jaw, which
had something Roman in its strength and its animalism.  He smiled from
time to time as he nestled back in his luxurious chair.  Indeed, he had
a right to feel well pleased, for, against the advice of six
colleagues, he had performed an operation that day of which only two
cases were on record, and the result had been brilliant beyond all
expectation.  No other man in London would have had the daring to plan,
or the skill to execute, such a heroic measure.

But he had promised Lady Sannox to see her that evening and it was
already half-past eight.  His hand was outstretched to the bell to
order the carriage when he heard the dull thud of the knocker.  An
instant later there was the shuffling of feet in the hall, and the
sharp closing of a door.

"A patient to see you, sir, in the consulting-room," said the butler.

"About himself?"

"No, sir; I think he wants you to go out."

"It is too late," cried Douglas Stone peevishly.  "I won't go."

"This is his card, sir."

The butler presented it upon the gold salver which had been given to
his master by the wife of a Prime Minister.

"'Hamil Ali, Smyrna.'  Hum!  The fellow is a Turk, I suppose."

"Yes, sir.  He seems as if he came from abroad, sir.  And he's in a
terrible way."

"Tut, tut!  I have an engagement.  I must go somewhere else.  But I'll
see him.  Show him in here, Pim."

A few moments later the butler swung open the door and ushered in a
small and decrepit man, who walked with a bent back and with the
forward push of the face and blink of the eyes which goes with extreme
short sight.  His face was swarthy, and his hair and beard of the
deepest black.  In one hand he held a turban of white muslin striped
with red, in the other a small chamois leather bag.

"Good-evening," said Douglas Stone, when the butler had closed the
door.  "You speak English, I presume?"

"Yes, sir.  I am from Asia Minor, but I speak English when I speak
slow."

"You wanted me to go out, I understand?"

"Yes, sir.  I wanted very much that you should see my wife."

"I could come in the morning, but I have an engagement which prevents
me from seeing your wife to-night."

The Turk's answer was a singular one.  He pulled the string which
closed the mouth of the chamois leather bag, and poured a flood of gold
on to the table.

"There are one hundred pounds there," said he, "and I promise you that
it will not take you an hour.  I have a cab ready at the door."

Douglas Stone glanced at his watch.  An hour would not make it too late
to visit Lady Sannox.  He had been there later.  And the fee was an
extraordinarily high one.  He had been pressed by his creditors lately,
and he could not afford to let such a chance pass.  He would go.

"What is the case?" he asked.

"Oh, it is so sad a one!  So sad a one!  You have not, perhaps, heard
of the daggers of the Almohades?"

"Never."

"Ah, they are Eastern daggers of a great age and of a singular shape,
with the hilt like what you call a stirrup.  I am a curiosity dealer,
you understand, and that is why I have come to England from Smyrna, but
next week I go back once more.  Many things I brought with me, and I
have a few things left, but among them, to my sorrow, is one of these
daggers."

"You will remember that I have an appointment, sir," said the surgeon,
with some irritation.  "Pray confine yourself to the necessary details."

"You will see that it is necessary.  To-day my wife fell down in a
faint in the room in which I keep my wares, and she cut her lower lip
upon this cursed dagger of Almohades."

"I see," said Douglas Stone, rising.  "And you wish me to dress the
wound?"

"No, no, it is worse than that."

"What then?"

"These daggers are poisoned."

"Poisoned!"

"Yes, and there is no man, East or West, who can tell now what is the
poison or what the cure.  But all that is known I know, for my father
was in this trade before me, and we have had much to do with these
poisoned weapons."

"What are the symptoms?"

"Deep sleep, and death in thirty hours."

"And you say there is no cure.  Why then should you pay me this
considerable fee?"

"No drug can cure, but the knife may."

"And how?"

"The poison is slow of absorption.  It remains for hours in the wound."

"Washing, then, might cleanse it?"

"No more than in a snake-bite.  It is too subtle and too deadly."

"Excision of the wound, then?"

"That is it.  If it be on the finger, take the finger off.  So said my
father always.  But think of where this wound is, and that it is my
wife.  It is dreadful!"

But familiarity with such grim matters may take the finer edge from a
man's sympathy.  To Douglas Stone this was already an interesting case,
and he brushed aside as irrelevant the feeble objections of the husband.

"It appears to be that or nothing," said he brusquely.  "It is better
to lose a lip than a life."

"Ah, yes, I know that you are right.  Well, well, it is kismet, and
must be faced.  I have the cab, and you will come with me and do this
thing."

Douglas Stone took his case of bistouries from a drawer, and placed it
with a roll of bandage and a compress of lint in his pocket.  He must
waste no more time if he were to see Lady Sannox.

"I am ready," said he, pulling on his overcoat.  "Will you take a glass
of wine before you go out into this cold air?"

His visitor shrank away, with a protesting hand upraised.

"You forget that I am a Mussulman, and a true follower of the Prophet,"
said he.  "But tell me what is the bottle of green glass which you have
placed in your pocket?"

"It is chloroform."

"Ah, that also is forbidden to us.  It is a spirit, and we make no use
of such things."

"What!  You would allow your wife to go through an operation without an
anaesthetic?"

"Ah! she will feel nothing, poor soul.  The deep sleep has already come
on, which is the first working of the poison.  And then I have given
her of our Smyrna opium.  Come, sir, for already an hour has passed."

As they stepped out into the darkness, a sheet of rain was driven in
upon their faces, and the hall lamp, which dangled from the arm of a
marble caryatid, went out with a fluff.  Pim, the butler, pushed the
heavy door to, straining hard with his shoulder against the wind, while
the two men groped their way towards the yellow glare which showed
where the cab was waiting.  An instant later they were rattling upon
their journey.

"Is it far?" asked Douglas Stone.

"Oh, no.  We have a very little quiet place off the Euston Road."

The surgeon pressed the spring of his repeater and listened to the
little tings which told him the hour.  It was a quarter past nine.  He
calculated the distances, and the short time which it would take him to
perform so trivial an operation.  He ought to reach Lady Sannox by ten
o'clock.  Through the fogged windows he saw the blurred gas-lamps
dancing past, with occasionally the broader glare of a shop front.  The
rain was pelting and rattling upon the leathern top of the carriage and
the wheels swashed as they rolled through puddle and mud.  Opposite to
him the white headgear of his companion gleamed faintly through the
obscurity.  The surgeon felt in his pockets and arranged his needles,
his ligatures and his safety-pins, that no time might be wasted when
they arrived.  He chafed with impatience and drummed his foot upon the
floor.

But the cab slowed down at last and pulled up.  In an instant Douglas
Stone was out, and the Smyrna merchant's toe was at his very heel.

"You can wait," said he to the driver.

It was a mean-looking house in a narrow and sordid street.  The
surgeon, who knew his London well, cast a swift glance into the
shadows, but there was nothing distinctive--no shop, no movement,
nothing but a double line of dull, flat-faced houses, a double stretch
of wet flagstones which gleamed in the lamplight, and a double rush of
water in the gutters which swirled and gurgled towards the sewer
gratings.  The door which faced them was blotched and discoloured, and
a faint light in the fan pane above it served to show the dust and the
grime which covered it.  Above, in one of the bedroom windows, there
was a dull yellow glimmer.  The merchant knocked loudly, and, as he
turned his dark face towards the light, Douglas Stone could see that it
was contracted with anxiety.  A bolt was drawn, and an elderly woman
with a taper stood in the doorway, shielding the thin flame with her
gnarled hand.

"Is all well?" gasped the merchant.

"She is as you left her, sir."

"She has not spoken?"

"No; she is in a deep sleep."

The merchant closed the door, and Douglas Stone walked down the narrow
passage, glancing about him in some surprise as he did so.  There was
no oilcloth, no mat, no hat-rack.  Deep grey dust and heavy festoons of
cobwebs met his eyes everywhere.  Following the old woman up the
winding stair, his firm footfall echoed harshly through the silent
house.  There was no carpet.

The bedroom was on the second landing.  Douglas Stone followed the old
nurse into it, with the merchant at his heels.  Here, at least, there
was furniture and to spare.  The floor was littered and the corners
piled with Turkish cabinets, inlaid tables, coats of chain mail,
strange pipes, and grotesque weapons.  A single small lamp stood upon a
bracket on the wall.  Douglas Stone took it down, and picking his way
among the lumber, walked over to a couch in the corner, on which lay a
woman dressed in the Turkish fashion, with yashmak and veil.  The lower
part of the face was exposed, and the surgeon saw a jagged cut which
zigzagged along the border of the under lip.

"You will forgive the yashmak," said the Turk.  "You know our views
about woman in the East."

But the surgeon was not thinking about the yashmak.  This was no longer
a woman to him.  It was a case.  He stooped and examined the wound
carefully.

"There are no signs of irritation," said he.  "We might delay the
operation until local symptoms develop."

The husband wrung his hands in incontrollable agitation.

"Oh! sir, sir!" he cried.  "Do not trifle. You do not know.  It is
deadly.  I know, and I give you my assurance that an operation is
absolutely necessary.  Only the knife can save her."

"And yet I am inclined to wait," said Douglas Stone.

"That is enough!" the Turk cried, angrily.  "Every minute is of
importance, and I cannot stand here and see my wife allowed to sink.
It only remains for me to give you my thanks for having come, and to
call in some other surgeon before it is too late."

Douglas Stone hesitated.  To refund that hundred pounds was no pleasant
matter.  But of course if he left the case he must return the money.
And if the Turk were right and the woman died, his position before a
coroner might be an embarrassing one.

"You have had personal experience of this poison?" he asked.

"I have."

"And you assure me that an operation is needful."

"I swear it by all that I hold sacred."

"The disfigurement will be frightful."

"I can understand that the mouth will not be a pretty one to kiss."

Douglas Stone turned fiercely upon the man.  The speech was a brutal
one.  But the Turk has his own fashion of talk and of thought, and
there was no time for wrangling.  Douglas Stone drew a bistoury from
his case, opened it and felt the keen straight edge with his
forefinger.  Then he held the lamp closer to the bed.  Two dark eyes
were gazing up at him through the slit in the yashmak.  They were all
iris, and the pupil was hardly to be seen.

"You have given her a very heavy dose of opium."

"Yes, she has had a good dose."

He glanced again at the dark eyes which looked straight at his own.
They were dull and lustreless, but, even as he gazed, a little shifting
sparkle came into them, and the lips quivered.

"She is not absolutely unconscious," said he.

"Would it not be well to use the knife while it would be painless?"

The same thought had crossed the surgeon's mind.  He grasped the
wounded lip with his forceps, and with two swift cuts he took out a
broad V-shaped piece.  The woman sprang up on the couch with a dreadful
gurgling scream.  Her covering was torn from her face.  It was a face
that he knew.  In spite of that protruding upper lip and that slobber
of blood, it was a face that he knew.  She kept on putting her hand up
to the gap and screaming.  Douglas Stone sat down at the foot of the
couch with his knife and his forceps.  The room was whirling round, and
he had felt something go like a ripping seam behind his ear.  A
bystander would have said that his face was the more ghastly of the
two.  As in a dream, or as if he had been looking at something at the
play, he was conscious that the Turk's hair and beard lay upon the
table, and that Lord Sannox was leaning against the wall with his hand
to his side, laughing silently.  The screams had died away now, and the
dreadful head had dropped back again upon the pillow, but Douglas Stone
still sat motionless, and Lord Sannox still chuckled quietly to himself.

"It was really very necessary for Marion, this operation," said he,
"not physically, but morally, you know, morally."

Douglas Stone stooped forwards and began to play with the fringe of the
coverlet.  His knife tinkled down upon the ground, but he still held
the forceps and something more.

"I had long intended to make a little example," said Lord Sannox,
suavely.  "Your note of Wednesday miscarried, and I have it here in my
pocket-book.  I took some pains in carrying out my idea.  The wound, by
the way, was from nothing more dangerous than my signet ring."

He glanced keenly at his silent companion, and cocked the small
revolver which he held in his coat pocket.  But Douglas Stone was still
picking at the coverlet.

"You see you have kept your appointment after all," said Lord Sannox.

And at that Douglas Stone began to laugh.  He laughed long and loudly.
But Lord Sannox did not laugh now.  Something like fear sharpened and
hardened his features.  He walked from the room, and he walked on
tiptoe.  The old woman was waiting outside.

"Attend to your mistress when she awakes," said Lord Sannox.

Then he went down to the street.  The cab was at the door, and the
driver raised his hand to his hat.

"John," said Lord Sannox, "you will take the doctor home first.  He
will want leading downstairs, I think.  Tell his butler that he has
been taken ill at a case."

"Very good, sir."

"Then you can take Lady Sannox home."

"And how about yourself, sir?"

"Oh, my address for the next few months will be Hotel di Roma, Venice.
Just see that the letters are sent on.  And tell Stevens to exhibit all
the purple chrysanthemums next Monday and to wire me the result."




A QUESTION OF DIPLOMACY.

The Foreign Minister was down with the gout.  For a week he had been
confined to the house, and he had missed two Cabinet Councils at a time
when the pressure upon his department was severe.  It is true that he
had an excellent undersecretary and an admirable staff, but the
Minister was a man of such ripe experience and of such proven sagacity
that things halted in his absence.  When his firm hand was at the wheel
the great ship of State rode easily and smoothly upon her way; when it
was removed she yawed and staggered until twelve British editors rose
up in their omniscience and traced out twelve several courses, each of
which was the sole and only path to safety.  Then it was that the
Opposition said vain things, and that the harassed Prime Minister
prayed for his absent colleague.

The Foreign Minister sat in his dressing-room in the great house in
Cavendish Square.  It was May, and the square garden shot up like a
veil of green in front of his window, but, in spite of the sunshine, a
fire crackled and sputtered in the grate of the sick-room.  In a
deep-red plush armchair sat the great statesman, his head leaning back
upon a silken pillow, one foot stretched forward and supported upon a
padded rest.  His deeply-lined, finely-chiselled face and slow-moving,
heavily-pouched eyes were turned upwards towards the carved and painted
ceiling, with that inscrutable expression which had been the despair
and the admiration of his Continental colleagues upon the occasion of
the famous Congress when he had made his first appearance in the arena
of European diplomacy.  Yet at the present moment his capacity for
hiding his emotions had for the instant failed him, for about the lines
of his strong, straight mouth and the puckers of his broad, overhanging
forehead, there were sufficient indications of the restlessness and
impatience which consumed him.

And indeed there was enough to make a man chafe, for he had much to
think of and yet was bereft of the power of thought.  There was, for
example, that question of the Dobrutscha and the navigation of the
mouths of the Danube which was ripe for settlement.  The Russian
Chancellor had sent a masterly statement upon the subject, and it was
the pet ambition of our Minister to answer it in a worthy fashion.
Then there was the blockade of Crete, and the British fleet lying off
Cape Matapan, waiting for instructions which might change the course of
European history.  And there were those three unfortunate Macedonian
tourists, whose friends were momentarily expecting to receive their
ears or their fingers in default of the exorbitant ransom which had
been demanded.  They must be plucked out of those mountains, by force
or by diplomacy, or an outraged public would vent its wrath upon
Downing Street.  All these questions pressed for a solution, and yet
here was the Foreign Minister of England, planted in an arm-chair, with
his whole thoughts and attention riveted upon the ball of his right
toe!  It was humiliating--horribly humiliating!  His reason revolted at
it.  He had been a respecter of himself, a respecter of his own will;
but what sort of a machine was it which could be utterly thrown out of
gear by a little piece of inflamed gristle?  He groaned and writhed
among his cushions.

But, after all, was it quite impossible that he should go down to the
House?  Perhaps the doctor was exaggerating the situation.  There was a
Cabinet Council that day.  He glanced at his watch.  It must be nearly
over by now.  But at least he might perhaps venture to drive down as
far as Westminster.  He pushed back the little round table with its
bristle of medicine-bottles, and levering himself up with a hand upon
either arm of the chair, he clutched a thick oak stick and hobbled
slowly across the room.  For a moment as he moved, his energy of mind
and body seemed to return to him.  The British fleet should sail from
Matapan.  Pressure should be brought to bear upon the Turks.  The
Greeks should be shown--Ow!  In an instant the Mediterranean was
blotted out, and nothing remained but that huge, undeniable, intrusive,
red-hot toe.  He staggered to the window and rested his left hand upon
the ledge, while he propped himself upon his stick with his right.
Outside lay the bright, cool, square garden, a few well-dressed
passers-by, and a single, neatly-appointed carriage, which was driving
away from his own door.  His quick eye caught the coat-of-arms on the
panel, and his lips set for a moment and his bushy eyebrows gathered
ominously with a deep furrow between them.  He hobbled back to his seat
and struck the gong which stood upon the table.

"Your mistress!" said he as the serving-man entered.

It was clear that it was impossible to think of going to the House.
The shooting up his leg warned him that his doctor had not
overestimated the situation.  But he had a little mental worry now
which had for the moment eclipsed his physical ailments.  He tapped the
ground impatiently with his stick until the door of the dressing-room
swung open, and a tall, elegant lady of rather more than middle age
swept into the chamber.  Her hair was touched with grey, but her calm,
sweet face had all the freshness of youth, and her gown of green shot
plush, with a sparkle of gold passementerie at her bosom and shoulders,
showed off the lines of her fine figure to their best advantage.

"You sent for me, Charles?"

"Whose carriage was that which drove away just now?"

"Oh, you've been up!" she cried, shaking an admonitory forefinger.
"What an old dear it is!  How can you be so rash?  What am I to say to
Sir William when he comes?  You know that he gives up his cases when
they are insubordinate."

"In this instance the case may give him up," said the Minister,
peevishly; "but I must beg, Clara, that you will answer my question."

"Oh! the carriage!  It must have been Lord Arthur Sibthorpe's."

"I saw the three chevrons upon the panel," muttered the invalid.

His lady had pulled herself a little straighter and opened her large
blue eyes.

"Then why ask?" she said.  "One might almost think, Charles, that you
were laying a trap!  Did you expect that I should deceive you?  You
have not had your lithia powder."

"For Heaven's sake, leave it alone!  I asked because I was surprised
that Lord Arthur should call here.  I should have fancied, Clara, that
I had made myself sufficiently clear on that point.  Who received him?"

"I did.  That is, I and Ida."

"I will not have him brought into contact with Ida.  I do not approve
of it.  The matter has gone too far already."

Lady Clara seated herself on a velvet-topped footstool, and bent her
stately figure over the Minister's hand, which she patted softly
between her own.

"Now you have said it, Charles," said she.  "It has gone too far--I
give you my word, dear, that I never suspected it until it was past all
mending.  I may be to blame--no doubt I am; but it was all so sudden.
The tail end of the season and a week at Lord Donnythorne's.  That was
all.  But oh!  Charlie, she loves him so, and she is our only one!  How
can we make her miserable?"

"Tut, tut!" cried the Minister impatiently, slapping on the plush arm
of his chair.  "This is too much.  I tell you, Clara, I give you my
word, that all my official duties, all the affairs of this great
empire, do not give me the trouble that Ida does."

"But she is our only one, Charles."

"The more reason that she should not make a mesalliance."

"Mesalliance, Charles!  Lord Arthur Sibthorpe, son of the Duke of
Tavistock, with a pedigree from the Heptarchy.  Debrett takes them
right back to Morcar, Earl of Northumberland."

The Minister shrugged his shoulders.

"Lord Arthur is the fourth son of the poorest duke in England," said
he.  "He has neither prospects nor profession."

"But, oh! Charlie, you could find him both."

"I do not like him.  I do not care for the connection."

"But consider Ida!  You know how frail her health is.  Her whole soul
is set upon him.  You would not have the heart, Charles, to separate
them?"

There was a tap at the door.  Lady Clara swept towards it and threw it
open.

"Yes, Thomas?"

"If you please, my lady, the Prime Minister is below."

"Show him up, Thomas."

"Now, Charlie, you must not excite yourself over public matters.  Be
very good and cool and reasonable, like a darling.  I am sure that I
may trust you."

She threw her light shawl round the invalid's shoulders, and slipped
away into the bed-room as the great man was ushered in at the door of
the dressing-room.

"My dear Charles," said he cordially, stepping into the room with all
the boyish briskness for which he was famous, "I trust that you find
yourself a little better.  Almost ready for harness, eh?  We miss you
sadly, both in the House and in the Council.  Quite a storm brewing
over this Grecian business.  The Times took a nasty line this morning."

"So I saw," said the invalid, smiling up at his chief.  "Well, well, we
must let them see that the country is not entirely ruled from Printing
House Square yet.  We must keep our own course without faltering."

"Certainly, Charles, most undoubtedly," assented the Prime Minister,
with his hands in his pockets.

"It was so kind of you to call.  I am all impatience to know what was
done in the Council."

"Pure formalities, nothing more.  By-the-way, the Macedonian prisoners
are all right."

"Thank Goodness for that!"

"We adjourned all other business until we should have you with us next
week.  The question of a dissolution begins to press.  The reports from
the provinces are excellent."

The Foreign Minister moved impatiently and groaned.

"We must really straighten up our foreign business a little," said he.
"I must get Novikoff's Note answered.  It is clever, but the fallacies
are obvious.  I wish, too, we could clear up the Afghan frontier.  This
illness is most exasperating.  There is so much to be done, but my
brain is clouded.  Sometimes I think it is the gout, and sometimes I
put it down to the colchicum."

"What will our medical autocrat say?" laughed the Prime Minister.  "You
are so irreverent, Charles.  With a bishop one may feel at one's ease.
They are not beyond the reach of argument.  But a doctor with his
stethoscope and thermometer is a thing apart.  Your reading does not
impinge upon him.  He is serenely above you.  And then, of course, he
takes you at a disadvantage.  With health and strength one might cope
with him.  Have you read Hahnemann?  What are your views upon
Hahnemann?"

The invalid knew his illustrious colleague too well to follow him down
any of those by-paths of knowledge in which he delighted to wander.  To
his intensely shrewd and practical mind there was something repellent
in the waste of energy involved in a discussion upon the Early Church
or the twenty-seven principles of Mesmer.  It was his custom to slip
past such conversational openings with a quick step and an averted face.

"I have hardly glanced at his writings," said he.  "By-the-way, I
suppose that there was no special departmental news?"

"Ah!  I had almost forgotten.  Yes, it was one of the things which I
had called to tell you.  Sir Algernon Jones has resigned at Tangier.
There is a vacancy there."

"It had better be filled at once.  The longer delay the more
applicants."

"Ah, patronage, patronage!" sighed the Prime Minister.  "Every vacancy
makes one doubtful friend and a dozen very positive enemies.  Who so
bitter as the disappointed place-seeker?  But you are right, Charles.
Better fill it at once, especially as there is some little trouble in
Morocco.  I understand that the Duke of Tavistock would like the place
for his fourth son, Lord Arthur Sibthorpe.  We are under some
obligation to the Duke."

The Foreign Minister sat up eagerly.

"My dear friend," he said, "it is the very appointment which I should
have suggested.  Lord Arthur would be very much better in Tangier at
present than in--in----"

"Cavendish Square?" hazarded his chief, with a little arch query of his
eyebrows.

"Well, let us say London.  He has manner and tact.  He was at
Constantinople in Norton's time."

"Then he talks Arabic?"

"A smattering.  But his French is good."

"Speaking of Arabic, Charles, have you dipped into Averroes?"

"No, I have not.  But the appointment would be an excellent one in
every way.  Would you have the great goodness to arrange the matter in
my absence?"

"Certainly, Charles, certainly.  Is there anything else that I can do?"

"No.  I hope to be in the House by Monday."

"I trust so.  We miss you at every turn.  The Times will try to make
mischief over that Grecian business.  A leader-writer is a terribly
irresponsible thing, Charles.  There is no method by which he may be
confuted, however preposterous his assertions.  Good-bye!  Read Porson!
Goodbye!"

He shook the invalid's hand, gave a jaunty wave of his broad-brimmed
hat, and darted out of the room with the same elasticity and energy
with which he had entered it.

The footman had already opened the great folding door to usher the
illustrious visitor to his carriage, when a lady stepped from the
drawing-room and touched him on the sleeve.  From behind the
half-closed portiere of stamped velvet a little pale face peeped out,
half-curious, half-frightened.

"May I have one word?"

"Surely, Lady Clara."

"I hope it is not intrusive.  I would not for the world overstep the
limits----"

"My dear Lady Clara!" interrupted the Prime Minister, with a youthful
bow and wave.

"Pray do not answer me if I go too far.  But I know that Lord Arthur
Sibthorpe has applied for Tangier.  Would it be a liberty if I asked
you what chance he has?"

"The post is filled up."

"Oh!"

In the foreground and background there was a disappointed face.

"And Lord Arthur has it."

The Prime Minister chuckled over his little piece of roguery.

"We have just decided it," he continued.

"Lord Arthur must go in a week.  I am delighted to perceive, Lady
Clara, that the appointment has your approval.  Tangier is a place of
extraordinary interest.  Catherine of Braganza and Colonel Kirke will
occur to your memory.  Burton has written well upon Northern Africa.  I
dine at Windsor, so I am sure that you will excuse my leaving you.  I
trust that Lord Charles will be better.  He can hardly fail to be so
with such a nurse."

He bowed, waved, and was off down the steps to his brougham.  As he
drove away, Lady Clara could see that he was already deeply absorbed in
a paper-covered novel.

She pushed back the velvet curtains, and returned into the
drawing-room.  Her daughter stood in the sunlight by the window, tall,
fragile, and exquisite, her features and outline not unlike her
mother's, but frailer, softer, more delicate.  The golden light struck
one half of her high-bred, sensitive face, and glimmered upon her
thickly-coiled flaxen hair, striking a pinkish tint from her
closely-cut costume of fawn-coloured cloth with its dainty cinnamon
ruchings.  One little soft frill of chiffon nestled round her throat,
from which the white, graceful neck and well-poised head shot up like a
lily amid moss.  Her thin white hands were pressed together, and her
blue eyes turned beseechingly upon her mother.

"Silly girl!  Silly girl!" said the matron, answering that imploring
look.  She put her hands upon her daughter's sloping shoulders and drew
her towards her.  "It is a very nice place for a short time.  It will
be a stepping stone."

"But oh! mamma, in a week!  Poor Arthur!"

"He will be happy."

"What! happy to part?"

"He need not part.  You shall go with him."

"Oh! mamma!"

"Yes, I say it."

"Oh! mamma, in a week?"

"Yes indeed.  A great deal may be done in a week.  I shall order your
trousseau to-day."

"Oh! you dear, sweet angel!  But I am so frightened!  And papa?  Oh!
dear, I am so frightened!"

"Your papa is a diplomatist, dear."

"Yes, ma."

"But, between ourselves, he married a diplomatist too.  If he can
manage the British Empire, I think that I can manage him, Ida.  How
long have you been engaged, child?"

"Ten weeks, mamma."

"Then it is quite time it came to a head.  Lord Arthur cannot leave
England without you.  You must go to Tangier as the Minister's wife.
Now, you will sit there on the settee, dear, and let me manage
entirely.  There is Sir William's carriage!  I do think that I know how
to manage Sir William.  James, just ask the doctor to step in this way!"

A heavy, two-horsed carriage had drawn up at the door, and there came a
single stately thud upon the knocker.  An instant afterwards the
drawing-room door flew open and the footman ushered in the famous
physician.  He was a small man, clean-shaven, with the old-fashioned
black dress and white cravat with high-standing collar.  He swung his
golden pince-nez in his right hand as he walked, and bent forward with
a peering, blinking expression, which was somehow suggestive of the
dark and complex cases through which he had seen.

"Ah," said he, as he entered.  "My young patient!  I am glad of the
opportunity."

"Yes, I wish to speak to you about her, Sir William.  Pray take this
arm-chair."

"Thank you, I will sit beside her," said he, taking his place upon the
settee.  "She is looking better, less anaemic unquestionably, and a
fuller pulse.  Quite a little tinge of colour, and yet not hectic."

"I feel stronger, Sir William."

"But she still has the pain in the side."

"Ah, that pain!"  He tapped lightly under the collar-bones, and then
bent forward with his biaural stethoscope in either ear.  "Still a
trace of dulness--still a slight crepitation," he murmured.

"You spoke of a change, doctor."

"Yes, certainly a judicious change might be advisable."

"You said a dry climate.  I wish to do to the letter what you
recommend."

"You have always been model patients."

"We wish to be.  You said a dry climate."

"Did I?  I rather forget the particulars of our conversation.  But a
dry climate is certainly indicated."

"Which one?"

"Well, I think really that a patient should be allowed some latitude.
I must not exact too rigid discipline.  There is room for individual
choice--the Engadine, Central Europe, Egypt, Algiers, which you like."

"I hear that Tangier is also recommended."

"Oh, yes, certainly; it is very dry."

"You hear, Ida? Sir William says that you are to go to Tangier."

"Or any----"

"No, no, Sir William!  We feel safest when we are most obedient.  You
have said Tangier, and we shall certainly try Tangier."

"Really, Lady Clara, your implicit faith is most flattering.  It is not
everyone who would sacrifice their own plans and inclinations so
readily."

"We know your skill and your experience, Sir William.  Ida shall try
Tangier.  I am convinced that she will be benefited."

"I have no doubt of it."

"But you know Lord Charles.  He is just a little inclined to decide
medical matters as he would an affair of State.  I hope that you will
be firm with him."

"As long as Lord Charles honours me so far as to ask my advice I am
sure that he would not place me in the false position of having that
advice disregarded."

The medical baronet whirled round the cord of his pince-nez and pushed
out a protesting hand.

"No, no, but you must be firm on the point of Tangier."

"Having deliberately formed the opinion that Tangier is the best place
for our young patient, I do not think that I shall readily change my
conviction."

"Of course not."

"I shall speak to Lord Charles upon the subject now when I go upstairs."

"Pray do."

"And meanwhile she will continue her present course of treatment.  I
trust that the warm African air may send her back in a few months with
all her energy restored."

He bowed in the courteous, sweeping, old-world fashion which had done
so much to build up his ten thousand a year, and, with the stealthy
gait of a man whose life is spent in sick-rooms, he followed the
footman upstairs.

As the red velvet curtains swept back into position, the Lady Ida threw
her arms round her mother's neck and sank her face on to her bosom.

"Oh! mamma, you <i>are</i> a diplomatist!" she cried.

But her mother's expression was rather that of the general who looked
upon the first smoke of the guns than of one who had won the victory.

"All will be right, dear," said she, glancing down at the fluffy yellow
curls and tiny ear.  "There is still much to be done, but I think we
may venture to order the trousseau."

"Oh I how brave you are!"

"Of course, it will in any case be a very quiet affair.  Arthur must
get the license.  I do not approve of hole-and-corner marriages, but
where the gentleman has to take up an official position some allowance
must be made.  We can have Lady Hilda Edgecombe, and the Trevors, and
the Grevilles, and I am sure that the Prime Minister would run down if
he could."

"And papa?"

"Oh, yes; he will come too, if he is well enough.  We must wait until
Sir William goes, and, meanwhile, I shall write to Lord Arthur."

Half an hour had passed, and quite a number of notes had been dashed
off in the fine, bold, park-paling handwriting of the Lady Clara, when
the door clashed, and the wheels of the doctor's carriage were heard
grating outside against the kerb.  The Lady Clara laid down her pen,
kissed her daughter, and started off for the sick-room.  The Foreign
Minister was lying back in his chair, with a red silk handkerchief over
his forehead, and his bulbous, cotton-wadded foot still protruding upon
its rest.

"I think it is almost liniment time," said Lady Clara, shaking a blue
crinkled bottle.  "Shall I put on a little?"

"Oh! this pestilent toe!" groaned the sufferer.  "Sir William won't
hear of my moving yet.  I do think he is the most completely obstinate
and pig-headed man that I have ever met.  I tell him that he has
mistaken his profession, and that I could find him a post at
Constantinople.  We need a mule out there."

"Poor Sir William!" laughed Lady Clara.  "But how has he roused your
wrath?"

"He is so persistent-so dogmatic."

"Upon what point?"

"Well, he has been laying down the law about Ida.  He has decreed, it
seems, that she is to go to Tangier."

"He said something to that effect before he went up to you."

"Oh, he did, did he?"

The slow-moving, inscrutable eye came sliding round to her.

Lady Clara's face had assumed an expression of transparent obvious
innocence, an intrusive candour which is never seen in nature save when
a woman is bent upon deception.

"He examined her lungs, Charles.  He did not say much, but his
expression was very grave."

"Not to say owlish," interrupted the Minister.

"No, no, Charles; it is no laughing matter.  He said that she must have
a change.  I am sure that he thought more than he said.  He spoke of
dulness and crepitation, and the effects of the African air.  Then the
talk turned upon dry, bracing health resorts, and he agreed that
Tangier was the place.  He said that even a few months there would work
a change."

"And that was all?"

"Yes, that was all."

Lord Charles shrugged his shoulders with the air of a man who is but
half convinced.

"But of course," said Lady Clara, serenely, "if you think it better
that Ida should not go she shall not.  The only thing is that if she
should get worse we might feel a little uncomfortable afterwards.  In a
weakness of that sort a very short time may make a difference.  Sir
William evidently thought the matter critical.  Still, there is no
reason why he should influence you.  It is a little responsibility,
however.  If you take it all upon yourself and free me from any of it,
so that afterwards----"

"My dear Clara, how you do croak!"

"Oh! I don't wish to do that, Charles.  But you remember what happened
to Lord Bellamy's child.  She was just Ida's age.  That was another
case in which Sir William's advice was disregarded."

Lord Charles groaned impatiently.

"I have not disregarded it," said he.

"No, no, of course not.  I know your strong sense, and your good heart
too well, dear.  You were very wisely looking at both sides of the
question.  That is what we poor women cannot do.  It is emotion against
reason, as I have often heard you say.  We are swayed this way and
that, but you men are persistent, and so you gain your way with us.
But I am so pleased that you have decided for Tangier."

"Have I?"

"Well, dear, you said that you would not disregard Sir William."

"Well, Clara, admitting that Ida is to go to Tangier, you will allow
that it is impossible for me to escort her?

"Utterly."

"And for you?

"While you are ill my place is by your side."

"There is your sister?"

"She is going to Florida."

"Lady Dumbarton, then?"

"She is nursing her father.  It is out of the question."

"Well, then, whom can we possibly ask?  Especially just as the season
is commencing.  You see, Clara, the fates fight against Sir William."

His wife rested her elbows against the back of the great red chair, and
passed her fingers through the statesman's grizzled curls, stooping
down as she did so until her lips were close to his ear.

"There is Lord Arthur Sibthorpe," said she softly.

Lord Charles bounded in his chair, and muttered a word or two such as
were more frequently heard from Cabinet Ministers in Lord Melbourne's
time than now.

"Are you mad, Clara!" he cried.  "What can have put such a thought into
your head?"

"The Prime Minister."

"Who?  The Prime Minister?"

"Yes, dear.  Now do, do be good!  Or perhaps I had better not speak to
you about it any more."

"Well, I really think that you have gone rather too far to retreat."

"It was the Prime Minister, then, who told me that Lord Arthur was
going to Tangier."

"It is a fact, though it had escaped my memory for the instant."

"And then came Sir William with his advice about Ida.  Oh! Charlie, it
is surely more than a coincidence!"

"I am convinced," said Lord Charles, with his shrewd, questioning gaze,
"that it is very much more than a coincidence, Lady Clara.  You are a
very clever woman, my dear.  A born manager and organiser."

Lady Clara brushed past the compliment.

"Think of our own young days, Charlie," she whispered, with her fingers
still toying with his hair.  "What were you then?  A poor man, not even
Ambassador at Tangier.  But I loved you, and believed in you, and have
I ever regretted it?  Ida loves and believes in Lord Arthur, and why
should she ever regret it either?"

Lord Charles was silent.  His eyes were fixed upon the green branches
which waved outside the window; but his mind had flashed back to a
Devonshire country-house of thirty years ago, and to the one fateful
evening when, between old yew hedges, he paced along beside a slender
girl, and poured out to her his hopes, his fears, and his ambitious.
He took the white, thin hand and pressed it to his lips.

"You, have been a good wife to me, Clara," said he.

She said nothing.  She did not attempt to improve upon her advantage.
A less consummate general might have tried to do so, and ruined all.
She stood silent and submissive, noting the quick play of thought which
peeped from his eyes and lip.  There was a sparkle in the one and a
twitch of amusement in the other, as he at last glanced up at her.

"Clara," said he, "deny it if you can!  You have ordered the trousseau."

She gave his ear a little pinch.

"Subject to your approval," said she.

"You have written to the Archbishop."

"It is not posted yet."

"You have sent a note to Lord Arthur."

"How could you tell that?"

"He is downstairs now."

"No; but I think that is his brougham."

Lord Charles sank back with a look of half-comical despair.

"Who is to fight against such a woman?" he cried.  "Oh! if I could send
you to Novikoff!  He is too much for any of my men.  But, Clara, I
cannot have them up here."

"Not for your blessing?"

"No, no!"

"It would make them so happy."

"I cannot stand scenes."

"Then I shall convey it to them."

"And pray say no more about it--to-day, at any rate.  I have been weak
over the matter."

"Oh! Charlie, you who are so strong!"

"You have outflanked me, Clara.  It was very well done.  I must
congratulate you."

"Well,"  she murmured, as she kissed him, "you know I have been
studying a very clever diplomatist for thirty years."




A MEDICAL DOCUMENT.

Medical men are, as a class, very much too busy to take stock of
singular situations or dramatic events.  Thus it happens that the
ablest chronicler of their experiences in our literature was a lawyer.
A life spent in watching over death-beds--or over birth-beds which are
infinitely more trying--takes something from a man's sense of
proportion, as constant strong waters might corrupt his palate.  The
overstimulated nerve ceases to respond.  Ask the surgeon for his best
experiences and he may reply that he has seen little that is
remarkable, or break away into the technical.  But catch him some night
when the fire has spurted up and his pipe is reeking, with a few of his
brother practitioners for company and an artful question or allusion to
set him going.  Then you will get some raw, green facts new plucked
from the tree of life.

It is after one of the quarterly dinners of the Midland Branch of the
British Medical Association.  Twenty coffee cups, a dozer liqueur
glasses, and a solid bank of blue smoke which swirls slowly along the
high, gilded ceiling gives a hint of a successful gathering.  But the
members have shredded off to their homes.  The line of heavy,
bulge-pocketed overcoats and of stethoscope-bearing top hats is gone
from the hotel corridor.  Round the fire in the sitting-room three
medicos are still lingering, however, all smoking and arguing, while a
fourth, who is a mere layman and young at that, sits back at the table.
Under cover of an open journal he is writing furiously with a
stylographic pen, asking a question in an innocent voice from time to
time and so flickering up the conversation whenever it shows a tendency
to wane.

The three men are all of that staid middle age which begins early and
lasts late in the profession.  They are none of them famous, yet each
is of good repute, and a fair type of his particular branch.  The
portly man with the authoritative manner and the white, vitriol splash
upon his cheek is Charley Manson, chief of the Wormley Asylum, and
author of the brilliant monograph--Obscure Nervous Lesions in the
Unmarried.  He always wears his collar high like that, since the
half-successful attempt of a student of Revelations to cut his throat
with a splinter of glass.  The second, with the ruddy face and the
merry brown eyes, is a general practitioner, a man of vast experience,
who, with his three assistants and his five horses, takes twenty-five
hundred a year in half-crown visits and shilling consultations out of
the poorest quarter of a great city.  That cheery face of Theodore
Foster is seen at the side of a hundred sick-beds a day, and if he has
one-third more names on his visiting list than in his cash book he
always promises himself that he will get level some day when a
millionaire with a chronic complaint--the ideal combination--shall seek
his services.  The third, sitting on the right with his dress shoes
shining on the top of the fender, is Hargrave, the rising surgeon.  His
face has none of the broad humanity of Theodore Foster's, the eye is
stern and critical, the mouth straight and severe, but there is
strength and decision in every line of it, and it is nerve rather than
sympathy which the patient demands when he is bad enough to come to
Hargrave's door.  He calls himself a jawman "a mere jawman" as he
modestly puts it, but in point of fact he is too young and too poor to
confine himself to a specialty, and there is nothing surgical which
Hargrave has not the skill and the audacity to do.

"Before, after, and during," murmurs the general practitioner in answer
to some interpolation of the outsider's.  "I assure you, Manson, one
sees all sorts of evanescent forms of madness."

"Ah, puerperal!" throws in the other, knocking the curved grey ash from
his cigar.  "But you had some case in your mind, Foster."

"Well, there was only one last week which was new to me.  I had been
engaged by some people of the name of Silcoe.  When the trouble came
round I went myself, for they would not hear of an assistant.  The
husband who was a policeman, was sitting at the head of the bed on the
further side.  'This won't do,' said I.  'Oh yes, doctor, it must do,'
said she.  'It's quite irregular and he must go,' said I.  'It's that
or nothing,' said she.  'I won't open my mouth or stir a finger the
whole night,' said he.  So it ended by my allowing him to remain, and
there he sat for eight hours on end.  She was very good over the
matter, but every now and again <i>he</i> would fetch a hollow groan, and I
noticed that he held his right hand just under the sheet all the time,
where I had no doubt that it was clasped by her left.  When it was all
happily over, I looked at him and his face was the colour of this cigar
ash, and his head had dropped on to the edge of the pillow.  Of course
I thought he had fainted with emotion, and I was just telling myself
what I thought of myself for having been such a fool as to let him stay
there, when suddenly I saw that the sheet over his hand was all soaked
with blood; I whisked it down, and  there was the fellow's wrist half
cut through.  The woman had one bracelet of a policeman's handcuff over
her left wrist and the other round his right one.  When she had been in
pain she had twisted with all her strength and the iron had fairly
eaten into the bone of the man's arm.  'Aye, doctor,' said she, when
she saw I had noticed it.  'He's got to take his share as well as me.
Turn and turn,' said she."

"Don't you find it a very wearing branch of the profession?" asks
Foster after a pause.

"My dear fellow, it was the fear of it that drove me into lunacy work."

"Aye, and it has driven men into asylums who never found their way on
to the medical staff.  I was a very shy fellow myself as a student, and
I know what it means."

"No joke that in general practice," says the alienist.

"Well, you hear men talk about it as though it were, but I tell you
it's much nearer tragedy.  Take some poor, raw, young fellow who has
just put up his plate in a strange town.  He has found it a trial all
his life, perhaps, to talk to a woman about lawn tennis and church
services.  When a young man <i>is</i> shy he is shyer than any girl.  Then
down comes an anxious mother and consults him upon the most intimate
family matters.  'I shall never go to that doctor again,' says she
afterwards.  'His manner is so stiff and unsympathetic.' Unsympathetic!
Why, the poor lad was struck dumb and paralysed.  I have known general
practitioners who were so shy that they could not bring themselves to
ask the way in the street.  Fancy what sensitive men like that must
endure before they get broken in to medical practice.  And then they
know that nothing is so catching as shyness, and that if they do not
keep a face of stone, their patient will be covered with confusion.
And so they keep their face of stone, and earn the reputation perhaps
of having a heart to correspond.  I suppose nothing would shake <i>your</i>
nerve, Manson."

"Well, when a man lives year in year out among a thousand lunatics,
with a fair sprinkling of homicidals among them, one's nerves either
get set or shattered.  Mine are all right so far."

"I was frightened once," says the surgeon.  "It was when I was doing
dispensary work.  One night I had a call from some very poor people,
and gathered from the few words they said that their child was ill.
When I entered the room I saw a small cradle in the corner.  Raising
the lamp I walked over and putting back the curtains I looked down at
the baby.  I tell you it was sheer Providence that I didn't drop that
lamp and set the whole place alight.  The head on the pillow turned and
I saw a face looking up at me which seemed to me to have more
malignancy and wickedness than ever I had dreamed of in a nightmare.
It was the flush of red over the cheekbones, and the brooding eyes full
of loathing of me, and of everything else, that impressed me.  I'll
never forget my start as, instead of the chubby face of an infant, my
eyes fell upon this creature.  I took the mother into the next room.
'What is it?' I asked.  'A girl of sixteen,' said she, and then
throwing up her arms, 'Oh, pray God she may be taken!'  The poor thing,
though she spent her life in this little cradle, had great, long, thin
limbs which she curled up under her.  I lost sight of the case and
don't know what became of it, but I'll never forget the look in her
eyes."

"That's creepy," says Dr. Foster.  "But I think one of my experiences
would run it close.  Shortly after I put up my plate I had a visit from
a little hunch-backed woman who wished me to come and attend to her
sister in her trouble.  When I reached the house, which was a very poor
one, I found two other little hunched-backed women, exactly like the
first, waiting for me in the sitting-room.  Not one of them said a
word, but my companion took the lamp and walked upstairs with her two
sisters behind her, and me bringing up the rear.  I can see those three
queer shadows cast by the lamp upon the wall as clearly as I can see
that tobacco pouch.  In the room above was the fourth sister, a
remarkably beautiful girl in evident need of my assistance.  There was
no wedding ring upon her finger.  The three deformed sisters seated
themselves round the room, like so many graven images, and all night
not one of them opened her mouth.  I'm not romancing, Hargrave; this is
absolute fact.  In the early morning a fearful thunderstorm broke out,
one of the most violent I have ever known.  The little garret burned
blue with the lightning, and thunder roared and rattled as if it were
on the very roof of the house.  It wasn't much of a lamp I had, and it
was a queer thing when a spurt of lightning came to see those three
twisted figures sitting round the walls, or to have the voice of my
patient drowned by the booming of the thunder.  By Jove!  I don't mind
telling you that there was a time when I nearly bolted from the room.
All came right in the end, but I never heard the true story of the
unfortunate beauty and her three crippled sisters."

"That's the worst of these medical stories," sighs the outsider.  "They
never seem to have an end."

"When a man is up to his neck in practice, my boy, he has no time to
gratify his private curiosity.  Things shoot across him and he gets a
glimpse of them, only to recall them, perhaps, at some quiet moment
like this.  But I've always felt, Manson, that your line had as much of
the terrible in it as any other."

"More," groans the alienist.  "A disease of the body is bad enough, but
this seems to be a disease of the soul.  Is it not a shocking thing--a
thing to drive a reasoning man into absolute Materialism--to think that
you may have a fine, noble fellow with every divine instinct and that
some little vascular change, the dropping, we will say, of a minute
spicule of bone from the inner table of his skull on to the surface of
his brain may have the effect of changing him to a filthy and pitiable
creature with every low and debasing tendency?  What a satire an asylum
is upon the majesty of man, and no less upon the ethereal nature of the
soul."

"Faith and hope," murmurs the general practitioner.

"I have no faith, not much hope, and all the charity I can afford,"
says the surgeon.  "When theology squares itself with the facts of life
I'll read it up."

"You were talking about cases," says the outsider, jerking the ink down
into his stylographic pen.

"Well, take a common complaint which kills many thousands every year,
like G. P. for instance."

"What's G. P.?"

"General practitioner," suggests the surgeon with a grin.

"The British public will have to know what G. P.  is," says the
alienist gravely.  "It's increasing by leaps and bounds, and it has the
distinction of being absolutely incurable.  General paralysis is its
full title, and I tell you it promises to be a perfect scourge.  Here's
a fairly typical case now which I saw last Monday week.  A young
farmer, a splendid fellow, surprised his fellows by taking a very rosy
view of things at a time when the whole country-side was grumbling.  He
was going to give up wheat, give up arable land, too, if it didn't pay,
plant two thousand acres of rhododendrons and get a monopoly of the
supply for Covent Garden--there was no end to his schemes, all sane
enough but just a bit inflated.  I called at the farm, not to see him,
but on an altogether different matter.  Something about the man's way
of talking struck me and I watched him narrowly.  His lip had a trick
of quivering, his words slurred themselves together, and so did his
handwriting when he had occasion to draw up a small agreement.  A
closer inspection showed me that one of his pupils was ever so little
larger than the other.  As I left the house his wife came after me.
'Isn't it splendid to see Job looking so well, doctor,' said she; 'he's
that full of energy he can hardly keep himself quiet.'  I did not say
anything, for I had not the heart, but I knew that the fellow was as
much condemned to death as though he were lying in the cell at Newgate.
It was a characteristic case of incipient G. P."

"Good heavens!" cries the outsider.  "My own lips tremble.  I often
slur my words.  I believe I've got it myself."

Three little chuckles come from the front of the fire.

"There's the danger of a little medical knowledge to the layman."

"A great authority has said that every first year's student is
suffering in silent agony from four diseases," remarks the surgeon.
"One is heart disease, of course; another is cancer of the parotid.  I
forget the two other."

"Where does the parotid come in?"

"Oh, it's the last wisdom tooth coming through!"

"And what would be the end of that young farmer?" asks the outsider.

"Paresis of all the muscles, ending in fits, coma, and death.  It may
be a few months, it may be a year or two.  He was a very strong young
man and would take some killing."

"By-the-way," says the alienist, "did I ever tell you about the first
certificate I signed?  I came as near ruin then as a man could go."

"What was it, then?"

"I was in practice at the time.  One morning a Mrs. Cooper called upon
me and informed me that her husband had shown signs of delusions
lately.  They took the form of imagining that he had been in the army
and had distinguished himself very much.  As a matter of fact he was a
lawyer and had never been out of England.  Mrs. Cooper was of opinion
that if I were to call it might alarm him, so it was agreed between us
that she should send him up in the evening on some pretext to my
consulting-room, which would give me the opportunity of having a chat
with him and, if I were convinced of his insanity, of signing his
certificate.  Another doctor had already signed, so that it only needed
my concurrence to have him placed under treatment.  Well, Mr. Cooper
arrived in the evening about half an hour before I had expected him,
and consulted me as to some malarious symptoms from which he said that
he suffered.  According to his account he had just returned from the
Abyssinian Campaign, and had been one of the first of the British
forces to enter Magdala.  No delusion could possibly be more marked,
for he would talk of little else, so I filled in the papers without the
slightest hesitation.  When his wife arrived, after he had left, I put
some questions to her to complete the form.  'What is his age?' I
asked.  'Fifty,' said she.  'Fifty!' I cried.  'Why, the man I examined
could not have been more than thirty!  And so it came out that the real
Mr. Cooper had never called upon me at all, but that by one of those
coincidences which take a man's breath away another Cooper, who really
was a very distinguished young officer of artillery, had come in to
consult me.  My pen was wet to sign the paper when I discovered it,"
says Dr. Manson, mopping his forehead.

"We were talking about nerve just now," observes the surgeon.  "Just
after my qualifying I served in the Navy for a time, as I think you
know.  I was on the flag-ship on the West African Station, and I
remember a singular example of nerve which came to my notice at that
time.  One of our small gunboats had gone up the Calabar river, and
while there the surgeon died of coast fever.  On the same day a man's
leg was broken by a spar falling upon it, and it became quite obvious
that it must be taken off above the knee if his life was to be saved.
The young lieutenant who was in charge of the craft searched among the
dead doctor's effects and laid his hands upon some chloroform, a
hip-joint knife, and a volume of Grey's Anatomy.  He had the man laid
by the steward upon the cabin table, and with a picture of a cross
section of the thigh in front of him he began to take off the limb.
Every now and then, referring to the diagram, he would say:  'Stand by
with the lashings, steward.  There's blood on the chart about here.'
Then he would jab with his knife until he cut the artery, and he and
his assistant would tie it up before they went any further.  In this
way they gradually whittled the leg off, and upon my word they made a
very excellent job of it.  The man is hopping about the Portsmouth Hard
at this day.

"It's no joke when the doctor of one of these isolated gunboats himself
falls ill," continues the surgeon after a pause.  "You might think it
easy for him to prescribe for himself, but this fever knocks you down
like a club, and you haven't strength left to brush a mosquito off your
face.  I had a touch of it at Lagos, and I know what I am telling you.
But there was a chum of mine who really had a curious experience.  The
whole crew gave him up, and, as they had never had a funeral aboard the
ship, they began rehearsing the forms so as to be ready.  They thought
that he was unconscious, but he swears he could hear every word that
passed.  'Corpse comin' up the latchway!' cried the Cockney sergeant of
Marines.  'Present harms!'  He was so amused, and so indignant too,
that he just made up his mind that he wouldn't be carried through that
hatchway, and he wasn't, either."

"There's no need for fiction in medicine," remarks Foster, "for the
facts will always beat anything you can fancy.  But it has seemed to me
sometimes that a curious paper might be read at some of these meetings
about the uses of medicine in popular fiction."

"How?"

"Well, of what the folk die of, and what diseases are made most use of
in novels.  Some are worn to pieces, and others, which are equally
common in real life, are never mentioned.  Typhoid is fairly frequent,
but scarlet fever is unknown.  Heart disease is common, but then heart
disease, as we know it, is usually the sequel of some foregoing
disease, of which we never hear anything in the romance.  Then there is
the mysterious malady called brain fever, which always attacks the
heroine after a crisis, but which is unknown under that name to the
text books.  People when they are over-excited in novels fall down in a
fit.  In a fairly large experience I have never known anyone do so in
real life.  The small complaints simply don't exist.  Nobody ever gets
shingles or quinsy, or mumps in a novel.  All the diseases, too, belong
to the upper part of the body.  The novelist never strikes below the
belt."

"I'll tell you what, Foster," says the alienist, "there is a side of
life which is too medical for the general public and too romantic for
the professional journals, but which contains some of the richest human
materials that a man could study.  It's not a pleasant side, I am
afraid, but if it is good enough for Providence to create, it is good
enough for us to try and understand.  It would deal with strange
outbursts of savagery and vice in the lives of the best men, curious
momentary weaknesses in the record of the sweetest women, known but to
one or two, and inconceivable to the world around.  It would deal, too,
with the singular phenomena of waxing and of waning manhood, and would
throw a light upon those actions which have cut short many an honoured
career and sent a man to a prison when he should have been hurried to a
consulting-room.  Of all evils that may come upon the sons of men, God
shield us principally from that one!"

"I had a case some little time ago which was out of the ordinary," says
the surgeon.  "There's a famous beauty in London society--I mention no
names--who used to be remarkable a few seasons ago for the very low
dresses which she would wear.  She had the whitest of skins and most
beautiful of shoulders, so it was no wonder.  Then gradually the
frilling at her neck lapped upwards and upwards, until last year she
astonished everyone by wearing quite a high collar at a time when it
was completely out of fashion.  Well, one day this very woman was shown
into my consulting-room.  When the footman was gone she suddenly tore
off the upper part of her dress.  'For Gods sake do something for me!'
she cried.  Then I saw what the trouble was.  A rodent ulcer was eating
its way upwards, coiling on in its serpiginous fashion until the end of
it was flush with her collar.  The red streak of its trail was lost
below the line of her bust.  Year by year it had ascended and she had
heightened her dress to hide it, until now it was about to invade her
face.  She had been too proud to confess her trouble, even to a medical
man."

"And did you stop it?"

"Well, with zinc chloride I did what I could.  But it may break out
again.  She was one of those beautiful white-and-pink creatures who are
rotten with struma.  You may patch but you can't mend."

"Dear! dear! dear!" cries the general practitioner, with that kindly
softening of the eyes which had endeared him to so many thousands.  "I
suppose we mustn't think ourselves wiser than Providence, but there are
times when one feels that something is wrong in the scheme of things.
I've seen some sad things in my life.  Did I ever tell you that case
where Nature divorced a most loving couple?  He was a fine young
fellow, an athlete and a gentleman, but he overdid athletics.  You know
how the force that controls us gives us a little tweak to remind us
when we get off the beaten track.  It may be a pinch on the great toe
if we drink too much and work too little.  Or it may be a tug on our
nerves if we dissipate energy too much.  With the athlete, of course,
it's the heart or the lungs.  He had bad phthisis and was sent to
Davos.  Well, as luck would have it, she developed rheumatic fever,
which left her heart very much affected.  Now, do you see the dreadful
dilemma in which those poor people found themselves?  When he came
below four thousand feet or so, his symptoms became terrible.  She
could come up about twenty-five hundred and then her heart reached its
limit.  They had several interviews half way down the valley, which
left them nearly dead, and at last, the doctors had to absolutely
forbid it.  And so for four years they lived within three miles of each
other and never met.  Every morning he would go to a place which
overlooked the chalet in which she lived and would wave a great white
cloth and she answer from below.  They could see each other quite
plainly with their field glasses, and they might have been in different
planets for all their chance of meeting."

"And one at last died," says the outsider.

"No, sir.  I'm sorry not to be able to clinch the story, but the man
recovered and is now a successful stockbroker in Drapers Gardens.  The
woman, too, is the mother of a considerable family.  But what are you
doing there?"

"Only taking a note or two of your talk."

The three medical men laugh as they walk towards their overcoats.

"Why, we've done nothing but talk shop," says the general practitioner.
"What possible interest can the public take in that?"




LOT NO. 249.

Of the dealings of Edward Bellingham with William Monkhouse Lee, and of
the cause of the great terror of Abercrombie Smith, it may be that no
absolute and final judgment will ever be delivered.  It is true that we
have the full and clear narrative of Smith himself, and such
corroboration as he could look for from Thomas Styles the servant, from
the Reverend Plumptree Peterson, Fellow of Old's, and from such other
people as chanced to gain some passing glance at this or that incident
in a singular chain of events.  Yet, in the main, the story must rest
upon Smith alone, and the most will think that it is more likely that
one brain, however outwardly sane, has some subtle warp in its texture,
some strange flaw in its workings, than that the path of Nature has
been overstepped in open day in so famed a centre of learning and light
as the University of Oxford.  Yet when we think how narrow and how
devious this path of Nature is, how dimly we can trace it, for all our
lamps of science, and how from the darkness which girds it round great
and terrible possibilities loom ever shadowly upwards, it is a bold and
confident man who will put a limit to the strange by-paths into which
the human spirit may wander.

In a certain wing of what we will call Old College in Oxford there is a
corner turret of an exceeding great age.  The heavy arch which spans
the open door has bent downwards in the centre under the weight of its
years, and the grey, lichen-blotched blocks of stone are, bound and
knitted together with withes and strands of ivy, as though the old
mother had set herself to brace them up against wind and weather.  From
the door a stone stair curves upward spirally, passing two landings,
and terminating in a third one, its steps all shapeless and hollowed by
the tread of so many generations of the seekers after knowledge.  Life
has flowed like water down this winding stair, and, waterlike, has left
these smooth-worn grooves behind it.  From the long-gowned, pedantic
scholars of Plantagenet days down to the young bloods of a later age,
how full and strong had been that tide of young English life.  And what
was left now of all those hopes, those strivings, those fiery energies,
save here and there in some old-world churchyard a few scratches upon a
stone, and perchance a handful of dust in a mouldering coffin?  Yet
here were the silent stair and the grey old wall, with bend and saltire
and many another heraldic device still to be read upon its surface,
like grotesque shadows thrown back from the days that had passed.

In the month of May, in the year 1884, three young men occupied the
sets of rooms which opened on to the separate landings of the old
stair.  Each set consisted simply of a sitting-room and of a bedroom,
while the two corresponding rooms upon the ground-floor were used, the
one as a coal-cellar, and the other as the living-room of the servant,
or gyp, Thomas Styles, whose duty it was to wait upon the three men
above him.  To right and to left was a line of lecture-rooms and of
offices, so that the dwellers in the old turret enjoyed a certain
seclusion, which made the chambers popular among the more studious
undergraduates.  Such were the three who occupied them now--Abercrombie
Smith above, Edward Bellingham beneath him, and William Monkhouse Lee
upon the lowest storey.

It was ten o'clock on a bright spring night, and Abercrombie Smith lay
back in his arm-chair, his feet upon the fender, and his briar-root
pipe between his lips.  In a similar chair, and equally at his ease,
there lounged on the other side of the fireplace his old school friend
Jephro Hastie.  Both men were in flannels, for they had spent their
evening upon the river, but apart from their dress no one could look at
their hard-cut, alert faces without seeing that they were open-air
men--men whose minds and tastes turned naturally to all that was manly
and robust.  Hastie, indeed, was stroke of his college boat, and Smith
was an even better oar, but a coming examination had already cast its
shadow over him and held him to his work, save for the few hours a week
which health demanded.  A litter of medical books upon the table, with
scattered bones, models and anatomical plates, pointed to the extent as
well as the nature of his studies, while a couple of single-sticks and
a set of boxing-gloves above the mantelpiece hinted at the means by
which, with Hastie's help, he might take his exercise in its most
compressed and least distant form.  They knew each other very well--so
well that they could sit now in that soothing silence which is the very
highest development of companionship.

"Have some whisky," said Abercrombie Smith at last between two
cloudbursts.  "Scotch in the jug and Irish in the bottle."

"No, thanks.  I'm in for the sculls.  I don't liquor when I'm training.
How about you?"

"I'm reading hard.  I think it best to leave it alone."

Hastie nodded, and they relapsed into a contented silence.

"By-the-way, Smith," asked Hastie, presently, "have you made the
acquaintance of either of the fellows on your stair yet?"

"Just a nod when we pass.  Nothing more."

"Hum! I should be inclined to let it stand at that.  I know something
of them both.  Not much, but as much as I want.  I don't think I should
take them to my bosom if I were you.  Not that there's much amiss with
Monkhouse Lee."

"Meaning the thin one?"

"Precisely.  He is a gentlemanly little fellow.  I don't think there is
any vice in him.  But then you can't know him without knowing
Bellingham."

"Meaning the fat one?"

"Yes, the fat one.  And he's a man whom I, for one, would rather not
know."

Abercrombie Smith raised his eyebrows and glanced across at his
companion.

"What's up, then?" he asked.  "Drink?  Cards?  Cad?  You used not to be
censorious."

"Ah! you evidently don't know the man, or you wouldn't ask.  There's
something damnable about him--something reptilian.  My gorge always
rises at him.  I should put him down as a man with secret vices--an
evil liver.  He's no fool, though.  They say that he is one  of the
best men in his line that they have ever had in the college."

"Medicine or classics?"

"Eastern languages.  He's a demon at them.  Chillingworth met him
somewhere above the second cataract last long, and he told me that he
just prattled to the Arabs as if he had been born and nursed and weaned
among them.  He talked Coptic to the Copts, and Hebrew to the Jews, and
Arabic to the Bedouins, and they were all ready to kiss the hem of his
frock-coat.  There are some old hermit Johnnies up in those parts who
sit on rocks and scowl and spit at the casual stranger.  Well, when
they saw this chap Bellingham, before he had said five words they just
lay down on their bellies and wriggled.  Chillingworth said that he
never saw anything like it.  Bellingham seemed to take it as his right,
too, and strutted about among them and talked down to them like a Dutch
uncle.  Pretty good for an undergrad. of Old's, wasn't it?"

"Why do you say you can't know Lee without knowing Bellingham?"

"Because Bellingham is engaged to his sister Eveline.  Such a bright
little girl, Smith!  I know the whole family well.  It's disgusting to
see that brute with her.  A toad and a dove, that's what they always
remind me of."

Abercrombie Smith grinned and knocked his ashes out against the side of
the grate.

"You show every card in your hand, old chap," said he.  "What a
prejudiced, green-eyed, evil-thinking old man it is!  You have really
nothing against the fellow except that."

"Well, I've known her ever since she was as long as that cherry-wood
pipe, and I don't like to see her taking risks.  And it is a risk.  He
looks beastly.  And he has a beastly temper, a venomous temper.  You
remember his row with Long Norton?"

"No; you always forget that I am a freshman."

"Ah, it was last winter.  Of course.  Well, you know the towpath along
by the river.  There were several fellows going along it, Bellingham in
front, when they came on an old market-woman coming the other way.  It
had been raining--you know what those fields are like when it has
rained--and the path ran between the river and a great puddle that was
nearly as broad.  Well, what does this swine do but keep the path, and
push the old girl into the mud, where she and her marketings came to
terrible grief.  It was a blackguard thing to do, and Long Norton, who
is as gentle a fellow as ever stepped, told him what he thought of it.
One word led to another, and it ended in Norton laying his stick across
the fellow's shoulders.  There was the deuce of a fuss about it, and
it's a treat to see the way in which Bellingham looks at Norton when
they meet now.  By Jove, Smith, it's nearly eleven o'clock!"

"No hurry.  Light your pipe again."

"Not I.  I'm supposed to be in training.  Here I've been sitting
gossiping when I ought to have been safely tucked up.  I'll borrow your
skull, if you can share it.  Williams has had mine for a month.  I'll
take the little bones of your ear, too, if you are sure you won't need
them.  Thanks very much.  Never mind a bag, I can carry them very well
under my arm.  Good-night, my son, and take my tip as to your
neighbour."

When Hastie, bearing his anatomical plunder, had clattered off down the
winding stair, Abercrombie Smith hurled his pipe into the wastepaper
basket, and drawing his chair nearer to the lamp, plunged into a
formidable green-covered volume, adorned with great colored maps of
that strange internal kingdom of which we are the hapless and helpless
monarchs.  Though a freshman at Oxford, the student was not so in
medicine, for he had worked for four years at Glasgow and at Berlin,
and this coming examination would place him finally as a member of his
profession.  With his firm mouth, broad forehead, and clear-cut,
somewhat hard-featured face, he was a man who, if he had no brilliant
talent, was yet so dogged, so patient, and so strong that he might in
the end overtop a more showy genius.  A man who can hold his own among
Scotchmen and North Germans is not a man to be easily set back.  Smith
had left a name at Glasgow and at Berlin, and he was bent now upon
doing as much at Oxford, if hard work and devotion could accomplish it.

He had sat reading for about an hour, and the hands of the noisy
carriage clock upon the side table were rapidly closing together upon
the twelve, when a sudden sound fell upon the student's ear--a sharp,
rather shrill sound, like the hissing intake of a man's breath who
gasps under some strong emotion.  Smith laid down his book and slanted
his ear to listen.  There was no one on either side or above him, so
that the interruption came certainly from the neighbour beneath--the
same neighbour of whom Hastie had given so unsavoury an account.  Smith
knew him only as a flabby, pale-faced man of silent and studious
habits, a man, whose lamp threw a golden bar from the old turret even
after he had extinguished his own.  This community in lateness had
formed a certain silent bond between them.  It was soothing to Smith
when the hours stole on towards dawning to feel that there was another
so close who set as small a value upon his sleep as he did.  Even now,
as his thoughts turned towards him, Smith's feelings were kindly.
Hastie was a good fellow, but he was rough, strong-fibred, with no
imagination or sympathy.  He could not tolerate departures from what he
looked upon as the model type of manliness.  If a man could not be
measured by a public-school standard, then he was beyond the pale with
Hastie.  Like so many who are themselves robust, he was apt to confuse
the constitution with the character, to ascribe to want of principle
what was really a want of circulation.  Smith, with his stronger mind,
knew his friend's habit, and made allowance for it now as his thoughts
turned towards the man beneath him.

There was no return of the singular sound, and Smith was about to turn
to his work once more, when suddenly there broke out in the silence of
the night a hoarse cry, a positive scream--the call of a man who is
moved and shaken beyond all control.  Smith sprang out of his chair and
dropped his book.  He was a man of fairly firm fibre, but there was
something in this sudden, uncontrollable shriek of horror which chilled
his blood and pringled in his skin.  Coming in such a place and at such
an hour, it brought a thousand fantastic possibilities into his head.
Should he rush down, or was it better to wait?  He had all the national
hatred of making a scene, and he knew so little of his neighbour that
he would not lightly intrude upon his affairs.  For a moment he stood
in doubt and even as he balanced the matter there was a quick rattle of
footsteps upon the stairs, and young Monkhouse Lee, half dressed and as
white as ashes, burst into his room.

"Come down!" he gasped.  "Bellingham's ill."

Abercrombie Smith followed him closely down stairs into the
sitting-room which was beneath his own, and intent as he was upon the
matter in hand, he could not but take an amazed glance around him as he
crossed the threshold.  It was such a chamber as he had never seen
before--a museum rather than a study.  Walls and ceiling were thickly
covered with a thousand strange relics from Egypt and the East.  Tall,
angular figures bearing burdens or weapons stalked in an uncouth frieze
round the apartments.  Above were bull-headed, stork-headed,
cat-headed, owl-headed statues, with viper-crowned, almond-eyed
monarchs, and strange, beetle-like deities cut out of the blue Egyptian
lapis lazuli.  Horus and Isis and Osiris peeped down from every niche
and shelf, while across the ceiling a true son of Old Nile, a great,
hanging-jawed crocodile, was slung in a double noose.

In the centre of this singular chamber was a large, square table,
littered with papers, bottles, and the dried leaves of some graceful,
palm-like plant.  These varied objects had all been heaped together in
order to make room for a mummy case, which had been conveyed from the
wall, as was evident from the gap there, and laid across the front of
the table.  The mummy itself, a horrid, black, withered thing, like a
charred head on a gnarled bush, was lying half out of the case, with
its clawlike hand and bony forearm resting upon the table.  Propped up
against the sarcophagus was an old yellow scroll of papyrus, and in
front of it, in a wooden armchair, sat the owner of the room, his head
thrown back, his widely-opened eyes directed in a horrified stare to
the crocodile above him, and his blue, thick lips puffing loudly with
every expiration.

"My God! he's dying!" cried Monkhouse Lee distractedly.

He was a slim, handsome young fellow, olive-skinned and dark-eyed, of a
Spanish rather than of an English type, with a Celtic intensity of
manner which contrasted with the Saxon phlegm of Abercombie Smith.

"Only a faint, I think," said the medical student.  "Just give me a
hand with him.  You take his feet.  Now on to the sofa.  Can you kick
all those little wooden devils off?  What a litter it is!  Now he will
be all right if we undo his collar and give him some water.  What has
he been up to at all?"

"I don't know.  I heard him cry out.  I ran up.  I know him pretty
well, you know.  It is very good of you to come down."

"His heart is going like a pair of castanets," said Smith, laying his
hand on the breast of the unconscious man.  "He seems to me to be
frightened all to pieces.  Chuck the water over him!  What a face he
has got on him!"

It was indeed a strange and most repellent face, for colour and outline
were equally unnatural.  It was white, not with the ordinary pallor of
fear but with an absolutely bloodless white, like the under side of a
sole.  He was very fat, but gave the impression of having at some time
been considerably fatter, for his skin hung loosely in creases and
folds, and was shot with a meshwork of wrinkles.  Short, stubbly brown
hair bristled up from his scalp, with a pair of thick, wrinkled ears
protruding on either side.  His light grey eyes were still open, the
pupils dilated and the balls projecting in a fixed and horrid stare.
It seemed to Smith as he looked down upon him that he had never seen
nature's danger signals flying so plainly upon a man's countenance, and
his thoughts turned more seriously to the warning which Hastie had
given him an hour before.

"What the deuce can have frightened him so?" he asked.

"It's the mummy."

"The mummy?  How, then?"

"I don't know.  It's beastly and morbid.  I wish he would drop it.
It's the second fright he has given me.  It was the same last winter.
I found him just like this, with that horrid thing in front of him."

"What does he want with the mummy, then?"

"Oh, he's a crank, you know.  It's his hobby.  He knows more about
these things than any man in England.  But I wish he wouldn't!  Ah,
he's beginning to come to."

A faint tinge of colour had begun to steal back into Bellingham's
ghastly cheeks, and his eyelids shivered like a sail after a calm.  He
clasped and unclasped his hands, drew a long, thin breath between his
teeth, and suddenly jerking up his head, threw a glance of recognition
around him.  As his eyes fell upon the mummy, he sprang off the sofa,
seized the roll of papyrus, thrust it into a drawer, turned the key,
and then staggered back on to the sofa.

"What's up?" he asked.  "What do you chaps want?"

"You've been shrieking out and making no end of a fuss," said Monkhouse
Lee.  "If our neighbour here from above hadn't come down, I'm sure I
don't know what I should have done with you."

"Ah, it's Abercrombie Smith," said Bellingham, glancing up at him.
"How very good of you to come in!  What a fool I am!  Oh, my God, what
a fool I am!"

He sunk his head on to his hands, and burst into peal after peal of
hysterical laughter.

"Look here!  Drop it!" cried Smith, shaking him roughly by the shoulder.

"Your nerves are all in a jangle.  You must drop these little midnight
games with mummies, or you'll be going off your chump.  You're all on
wires now."

"I wonder," said Bellingham, "whether you would be as cool as I am if
you had seen----"

"What then?"

"Oh, nothing.  I meant that I wonder if you could sit up at night with
a mummy without trying your nerves.  I have no doubt that you are quite
right.  I dare say that I have been taking it out of myself too much
lately.  But I am all right now.  Please don't go, though.  Just wait
for a few minutes until I am quite myself."

"The room is very close," remarked Lee, throwing open the window and
letting in the cool night air.

"It's balsamic resin," said Bellingham.  He lifted up one of the dried
palmate leaves from the table and frizzled it over the chimney of the
lamp.  It broke away into heavy smoke wreaths, and a pungent, biting
odour filled the chamber.  "It's the sacred plant--the plant of the
priests," he remarked.  "Do you know anything of Eastern languages,
Smith?"

"Nothing at all.  Not a word."

The answer seemed to lift a weight from the Egyptologist's mind.

"By-the-way," he continued, "how long was it from the time that you ran
down, until I came to my senses?"

"Not long.  Some four or five minutes."

"I thought it could not be very long," said he, drawing a long breath.
"But what a strange thing unconsciousness is!  There is no measurement
to it.  I could not tell from my own sensations if it were seconds or
weeks.  Now that gentleman on the table was packed up in the days of
the eleventh dynasty, some forty centuries ago, and yet if he could
find his tongue he would tell us that this lapse of time has been but a
closing of the eyes and a reopening of them.  He is a singularly fine
mummy, Smith."

Smith stepped over to the table and looked down with a professional eye
at the black and twisted form in front of him.  The features, though
horribly discoloured, were perfect, and two little nut-like eyes still
lurked in the depths of the black, hollow sockets.  The blotched skin
was drawn tightly from bone to bone, and a tangled wrap of black coarse
hair fell over the ears.  Two thin teeth, like those of a rat, overlay
the shrivelled lower lip.  In its crouching position, with bent joints
and craned head, there was a suggestion of energy about the horrid
thing which made Smith's gorge rise.  The gaunt ribs, with their
parchment-like covering, were exposed, and the sunken, leaden-hued
abdomen, with the long slit where the embalmer had left his mark; but
the lower limbs were wrapt round with coarse yellow bandages.  A number
of little clove-like pieces of myrrh and of cassia were sprinkled over
the body, and lay scattered on the inside of the case.

"I don't know his name," said Bellingham, passing his hand over the
shrivelled head.  "You see the outer sarcophagus with the inscriptions
is missing.  Lot 249 is all the title he has now.  You see it printed
on his case.  That was his number in the auction at which I picked him
up."

"He has been a very pretty sort of fellow in his day," remarked
Abercrombie Smith.

"He has been a giant.  His mummy is six feet seven in length, and that
would be a giant over there, for they were never a very robust race.
Feel these great knotted bones, too.  He would be a nasty fellow to
tackle."

"Perhaps these very hands helped to build the stones into the
pyramids," suggested Monkhouse Lee, looking down with disgust in his
eyes at the crooked, unclean talons.

"No fear.  This fellow has been pickled in natron, and looked after in
the most approved style.  They did not serve hodsmen in that fashion.
Salt or bitumen was enough for them.  It has been calculated that this
sort of thing cost about seven hundred and thirty pounds in our money.
Our friend was a noble at the least.  What do you make of that small
inscription near his feet, Smith?"

"I told you that I know no Eastern tongue."

"Ah, so you did.  It is the name of the embalmer, I take it.  A very
conscientious worker he must have been.  I wonder how many modern works
will survive four thousand years?"

He kept on speaking lightly and rapidly, but it was evident to
Abercrombie Smith that he was still palpitating with fear.  His hands
shook, his lower lip trembled, and look where he would, his eye always
came sliding round to his gruesome companion.  Through all his fear,
however, there was a suspicion of triumph in his tone and manner.  His
eye shone, and his footstep, as he paced the room, was brisk and
jaunty.  He gave the impression of a man who has gone through an
ordeal, the marks of which he still bears upon him, but which has
helped him to his end.

"You're not going yet?" he cried, as Smith rose from the sofa.

At the prospect of solitude, his fears seemed to crowd back upon him,
and he stretched out a hand to detain him.

"Yes, I must go.  I have my work to do.  You are all right now.  I
think that with your nervous system you should take up some less morbid
study."

"Oh, I am not nervous as a rule; and I have unwrapped mummies before."

"You fainted last time," observed Monkhouse Lee.

"Ah, yes, so I did.  Well, I must have a nerve tonic or a course of
electricity.  You are not going, Lee?"

"I'll do whatever you wish, Ned."

"Then I'll come down with you and have a shake-down on your sofa.
Good-night, Smith.  I am so sorry to have disturbed you with my
foolishness."

They shook hands, and as the medical student stumbled up the spiral and
irregular stair he heard a key turn in a door, and the steps of his two
new acquaintances as they descended to the lower floor.


In this strange way began the acquaintance between Edward Bellingham
and Abercrombie Smith, an acquaintance which the latter, at least, had
no desire to push further.  Bellingham, however, appeared to have taken
a fancy to his rough-spoken neighbour, and made his advances in such a
way that he could hardly be repulsed without absolute brutality.  Twice
he called to thank Smith for his assistance, and many times afterwards
he looked in with books, papers, and such other civilities as two
bachelor neighbours can offer each other.  He was, as Smith soon found,
a man of wide reading, with catholic tastes and an extraordinary
memory.  His manner, too, was so pleasing and suave that one came,
after a time, to overlook his repellent appearance.  For a jaded and
wearied man he was no unpleasant companion, and Smith found himself,
after a time, looking forward to his visits, and even returning them.

Clever as he undoubtedly was, however, the medical student seemed to
detect a dash of insanity in the man.  He broke out at times into a
high, inflated style of talk which was in contrast with the simplicity
of his life.

"It is a wonderful thing," he cried, "to feel that one can command
powers of good and of evil--a ministering angel or a demon of
vengeance."  And again, of Monkhouse Lee, he said,--"Lee is a good
fellow, an honest fellow, but he is without strength or ambition.  He
would not make a fit partner for a man with a great enterprise.  He
would not make a fit partner for me."

At such hints and innuendoes stolid Smith, puffing solemnly at his
pipe, would simply raise his eyebrows and shake his head, with little
interjections of medical wisdom as to earlier hours and fresher air.

One habit Bellingham had developed of late which Smith knew to be a
frequent herald of a weakening mind.  He appeared to be forever talking
to himself.  At late hours of the night, when there could be no visitor
with him, Smith could still hear his voice beneath him in a low,
muffled monologue, sunk almost to a whisper, and yet very audible in
the silence.  This solitary babbling annoyed and distracted the
student, so that he spoke more than once to his neighbour about it.
Bellingham, however, flushed up at the charge, and denied curtly that
he had uttered a sound; indeed, he showed more annoyance over the
matter than the occasion seemed to demand.

Had Abercrombie Smith had any doubt as to his own ears he had not to go
far to find corroboration.  Tom Styles, the little wrinkled man-servant
who had attended to the wants of the lodgers in the turret for a longer
time than any man's memory could carry him, was sorely put to it over
the same matter.

"If you please, sir," said he, as he tidied down the top chamber one
morning, "do you think Mr. Bellingham is all right, sir?"

"All right, Styles?"

"Yes sir.  Right in his head, sir."

"Why should he not be, then?"

"Well, I don't know, sir.  His habits has changed of late.  He's not
the same man he used to be, though I make free to say that he was never
quite one of my gentlemen, like Mr. Hastie or yourself, sir.  He's took
to talkin' to himself something awful.  I wonder it don't disturb you.
I don't know what to make of him, sir."

"I don't know what business it is of yours, Styles."

"Well, I takes an interest, Mr. Smith.  It may be forward of me, but I
can't help it.  I feel sometimes as if I was mother and father to my
young gentlemen.  It all falls on me when things go wrong and the
relations come.  But Mr. Bellingham, sir.  I want to know what it is
that walks about his room sometimes when he's out and when the door's
locked on the outside."

"Eh! you're talking nonsense, Styles."

"Maybe so, sir; but I heard it more'n once with my own ears."

"Rubbish, Styles."

"Very good, sir.  You'll ring the bell if you want me."

Abercrombie Smith gave little heed to the gossip of the old
man-servant, but a small incident occurred a few days later which left
an unpleasant effect upon his mind, and brought the words of Styles
forcibly to his memory.

Bellingham had come up to see him late one night, and was entertaining
him with an interesting account of the rock tombs of Beni Hassan in
Upper Egypt, when Smith, whose hearing was remarkably acute, distinctly
heard the sound of a door opening on the landing below.

"There's some fellow gone in or out of your room," he remarked.

Bellingham sprang up and stood helpless for a moment, with the
expression of a man who is half incredulous and half afraid.

"I surely locked it.  I am almost positive that I locked it," he
stammered.  "No one could have opened it."

"Why, I hear someone coming up the steps now," said Smith.

Bellingham rushed out through the door, slammed it loudly behind him,
and hurried down the stairs.  About half-way down Smith heard him stop,
and thought he caught the sound of whispering.  A moment later the door
beneath him shut, a key creaked in a lock, and Bellingham, with beads
of moisture upon his pale face, ascended the stairs once more, and
re-entered the room.

"It's all right," he said, throwing himself down in a chair.  "It was
that fool of a dog.  He had pushed the door open.  I don't know how I
came to forget to lock it."

"I didn't know you kept a dog," said Smith, looking very thoughtfully
at the disturbed face of his companion.

"Yes, I haven't had him long.  I must get rid of him.  He's a great
nuisance."

"He must be, if you find it so hard to shut him up.  I should have
thought that shutting the door would have been enough, without locking
it."

"I want to prevent old Styles from letting him out.  He's of some
value, you know, and it would be awkward to lose him."

"I am a bit of a dog-fancier myself," said Smith, still gazing hard at
his companion from the corner of his eyes.  "Perhaps you'll let me have
a look at it."

"Certainly.  But I am afraid it cannot be to-night; I have an
appointment.  Is that clock right?  Then I am a quarter of an hour late
already.  You'll excuse me, I am sure."

He picked up his cap and hurried from the room.  In spite of his
appointment, Smith heard him re-enter his own chamber and lock his door
upon the inside.

This interview left a disagreeable impression upon the medical
student's mind.  Bellingham had lied to him, and lied so clumsily that
it looked as if he had desperate reasons for concealing the truth.
Smith knew that his neighbour had no dog.  He knew, also, that the step
which he had heard upon the stairs was not the step of an animal.  But
if it were not, then what could it be?  There was old Styles's
statement about the something which used to pace the room at times when
the owner was absent.  Could it be a woman?  Smith rather inclined to
the view.  If so, it would mean disgrace and expulsion to Bellingham if
it were discovered by the authorities, so that his anxiety and
falsehoods might be accounted for.  And yet it was inconceivable that
an undergraduate could keep a woman in his rooms without being
instantly detected.  Be the explanation what it might, there was
something ugly about it, and Smith determined, as he turned to his
books, to discourage all further attempts at intimacy on the part of
his soft-spoken and ill-favoured neighbour.

But his work was destined to interruption that night.  He had hardly
caught tip the broken threads when a firm, heavy footfall came three
steps at a time from below, and Hastie, in blazer and flannels, burst
into the room.

"Still at it!" said he, plumping down into his wonted arm-chair.  "What
a chap you are to stew!  I believe an earthquake might come and knock
Oxford into a cocked hat, and you would sit perfectly placid with your
books among the rains.  However, I won't bore you long.  Three whiffs
of baccy, and I am off."

"What's the news, then?" asked Smith, cramming a plug of bird's-eye
into his briar with his forefinger.

"Nothing very much.  Wilson made 70 for the freshmen against the
eleven.  They say that they will play him instead of Buddicomb, for
Buddicomb is clean off colour.  He used to be able to bowl a little,
but it's nothing but half-vollies and long hops now."

"Medium right," suggested Smith, with the intense gravity which comes
upon a 'varsity man when he speaks of athletics.

"Inclining to fast, with a work from leg.  Comes with the arm about
three inches or so.  He used to be nasty on a wet wicket.  Oh,
by-the-way, have you heard about Long Norton?"

"What's that?"

"He's been attacked."

"Attacked?"

"Yes, just as he was turning out of the High Street, and within a
hundred yards of the gate of Old's."

"But who----"

"Ah, that's the rub!  If you said 'what,' you would be more
grammatical.  Norton swears that it was not human, and, indeed, from
the scratches on his throat, I should be inclined to agree with him."

"What, then?  Have we come down to spooks?"

Abercrombie Smith puffed his scientific contempt.

"Well, no; I don't think that is quite the idea, either.  I am inclined
to think that if any showman has lost a great ape lately, and the brute
is in these parts, a jury would find a true bill against it.  Norton
passes that way every night, you know, about the same hour.  There's a
tree that hangs low over the path--the big elm from Rainy's garden.
Norton thinks the thing dropped on him out of the tree.  Anyhow, he was
nearly strangled by two arms, which, he says, were as strong and as
thin as steel bands.  He saw nothing; only those beastly arms that
tightened and tightened on him.  He yelled his head nearly off, and a
couple of chaps came running, and the thing went over the wall like a
cat.  He never got a fair sight of it the whole time.  It gave Norton a
shake up, I can tell you.  I tell him it has been as good as a change
at the sea-side for him."

"A garrotter, most likely," said Smith.

"Very possibly.  Norton says not; but we don't mind what he says.  The
garrotter had long nails, and was pretty smart at swinging himself over
walls.  By-the-way, your beautiful neighbour would be pleased if he
heard about it.  He had a grudge against Norton, and he's not a man,
from what I know of him, to forget his little debts.  But hallo, old
chap, what have you got in your noddle?"

"Nothing," Smith answered curtly.

He had started in his chair, and the look had flashed over his face
which comes upon a man who is struck suddenly by some unpleasant idea.

"You looked as if something I had said had taken you on the raw.
By-the-way, you have made the acquaintance of Master B. since I looked
in last, have you not?  Young Monkhouse Lee told me something to that
effect."

"Yes; I know him slightly.  He has been up here once or twice."

"Well, you're big enough and ugly enough to take care of yourself.
He's not what I should call exactly a healthy sort of Johnny, though,
no doubt, he's very clever, and all that.  But you'll soon find out for
yourself.  Lee is all right; he's a very decent little fellow.  Well,
so long, old chap!  I row Mullins for the Vice-Chancellor's pot on
Wednesday week, so mind you come down, in case I don't see you before."

Bovine Smith laid down his pipe and turned stolidly to his books once
more.  But with all the will in the world, he found it very hard to
keep his mind upon his work.  It would slip away to brood upon the man
beneath him, and upon the little mystery which hung round his chambers.
Then his thoughts turned to this singular attack of which Hastie had
spoken, and to the grudge which Bellingham was said to owe the object
of it.  The two ideas would persist in rising together in his mind, as
though there were some close and intimate connection between them.  And
yet the suspicion was so dim and vague that it could not be put down in
words.

"Confound the chap!" cried Smith, as he shied his book on pathology
across the room.  "He has spoiled my night's reading, and that's reason
enough, if there were no other, why I should steer clear of him in the
future."

For ten days the medical student confined himself so closely to his
studies that he neither saw nor heard anything of either of the men
beneath him.  At the hours when Bellingham had been accustomed to visit
him, he took care to sport his oak, and though he more than once heard
a knocking at his outer door, he resolutely refused to answer it.  One
afternoon, however, he was descending the stairs when, just as he was
passing it, Bellingham's door flew open, and young Monkhouse Lee came
out with his eyes sparkling and a dark flush of anger upon his olive
cheeks.  Close at his heels followed Bellingham, his fat, unhealthy
face all quivering with malignant passion.

"You fool!" he hissed.  "You'll  be  sorry."

"Very likely," cried the other.  "Mind what I say.  It's off!  I won't
hear of it!"

"You've promised, anyhow."

"Oh, I'll keep that!  I won't speak.  But I'd rather little Eva was in
her grave.  Once for all, it's off.  She'll do what I say.  We don't
want to see you again."

So much Smith could not avoid hearing, but he hurried on, for he had no
wish to be involved in their dispute.  There had been a serious breach
between them, that was clear enough, and Lee was going to cause the
engagement with his sister to be broken off.  Smith thought of Hastie's
comparison of the toad and the dove, and was glad to think that the
matter was at an end.  Bellingham's face when he was in a passion was
not pleasant to look upon.  He was not a man to whom an innocent girl
could be trusted for life.  As he walked, Smith wondered languidly what
could have caused the quarrel, and what the promise might be which
Bellingham had been so anxious that Monkhouse Lee should keep.

It was the day of the sculling match between Hastie and Mullins, and a
stream of men were making their way down to the banks of the Isis.  A
May sun was shining brightly, and the yellow path was barred with the
black shadows of the tall elm-trees.  On either side the grey colleges
lay back from the road, the hoary old mothers of minds looking out from
their high, mullioned windows at the tide of young life which swept so
merrily past them.  Black-clad tutors, prim officials, pale reading
men, brown-faced, straw-hatted young athletes in white sweaters or
many-coloured blazers, all were hurrying towards the blue winding river
which curves through the Oxford meadows.

Abercrombie Smith, with the intuition of an old oarsman, chose his
position at the point where he knew that the struggle, if there were a
struggle, would come.  Far off he heard the hum which announced the
start, the gathering roar of the approach, the thunder of running feet,
and the shouts of the men in the boats beneath him.  A spray of
half-clad, deep-breathing runners shot past him, and craning over their
shoulders, he saw Hastie pulling a steady thirty-six, while his
opponent, with a jerky forty, was a good boat's length behind him.
Smith gave a cheer for his friend, and pulling out his watch, was
starting off again for his chambers, when he felt a touch upon his
shoulder, and found that young Monkhouse Lee was beside him.

"I saw you there," he said, in a timid, deprecating way.  "I wanted to
speak to you, if you could spare me a half-hour.  This cottage is mine.
I share it with Harrington of King's.  Come in and have a cup of tea."

"I must be back presently," said Smith.  "I am hard on the grind at
present.  But I'll come in for a few minutes with pleasure.  I wouldn't
have come out only Hastie is a friend of mine."

"So he is of mine.  Hasn't he a beautiful style?  Mullins wasn't in it.
But come into the cottage.  It's a little den of a place, but it is
pleasant to work in during the summer months."

It was a small, square, white building, with green doors and shutters,
and a rustic trellis-work porch, standing back some fifty yards from
the river's bank.  Inside, the main room was roughly fitted up as a
study--deal table, unpainted shelves with books, and a few cheap
oleographs upon the wall.  A kettle sang upon a spirit-stove, and there
were tea things upon a tray on the table.

"Try that chair and have a cigarette," said Lee.  "Let me pour you out
a cup of tea.  It's so good of you to come in, for I know that your
time is a good deal taken up.  I wanted to say to you that, if I were
you, I should change my rooms at once."

"Eh?"

Smith sat staring with a lighted match in one hand and his unlit
cigarette in the other.

"Yes; it must seem very extraordinary, and the worst of it is that I
cannot give my reasons, for I am under a solemn promise--a very solemn
promise.  But I may go so far as to say that I don't think Bellingham
is a very safe man to live near.  I intend to camp out here as much as
I can for a time."

"Not safe!  What do you mean?"

"Ah, that's what I mustn't say.  But do take my advice, and move your
rooms.  We had a grand row to-day.  You must have heard us, for you
came down the stairs."

"I saw that you had fallen out."

"He's a horrible chap, Smith.  That is the only word for him.  I have
had doubts about him ever since that night when he fainted--you
remember, when you came down.  I taxed him to-day, and he told me
things that made my hair rise, and wanted me to stand in with him.  I'm
not strait-laced, but I am a clergyman's son, you know, and I think
there are some things which are quite beyond the pale.  I only thank
God that I found him out before it was too late, for he was to have
married into my family."

"This is all very fine, Lee," said Abercrombie Smith curtly.  "But
either you are saying a great deal too much or a great deal too little."

"I give you a warning."

"If there is real reason for warning, no promise can bind you.  If I
see a rascal about to blow a place up with dynamite no pledge will
stand in my way of preventing him."

"Ah, but I cannot prevent him, and I can do nothing but warn you."

"Without saying what you warn me against."

"Against Bellingham."

"But that is childish.  Why should I fear him, or any man?"

"I can't tell you.  I can only entreat you to change your rooms.  You
are in danger where you are.  I don't even say that Bellingham would
wish to injure you.  But it might happen, for he is a dangerous
neighbour just now."

"Perhaps I know more than you think," said Smith, looking keenly at the
young man's boyish, earnest face.  "Suppose I tell you that some one
else shares Bellingham's rooms."

Monkhouse Lee sprang from his chair in uncontrollable excitement.

"You know, then?" he gasped.

"A woman."

Lee dropped back again with a groan.

"My lips are sealed," he said.  "I must not speak."

"Well, anyhow," said Smith, rising, "it is not likely that I should
allow myself to be frightened out of rooms which suit me very nicely.
It would be a little too feeble for me to move out all my goods and
chattels because you say that Bellingham might in some unexplained way
do me an injury.  I think that I'll just take my chance, and stay where
I am, and as I see that it's nearly five o'clock, I must ask you to
excuse me."

He bade the young student adieu in a few curt words, and made his way
homeward through the sweet spring evening feeling half-ruffled,
half-amused, as any other strong, unimaginative man might who has been
menaced by a vague and shadowy danger.

There was one little indulgence which Abercrombie Smith always allowed
himself, however closely his work might press upon him.  Twice a week,
on the Tuesday and the Friday, it was his invariable custom to walk
over to Farlingford, the residence of Dr. Plumptree Peterson, situated
about a mile and a half out of Oxford.  Peterson had been a close
friend of Smith's elder brother Francis, and as he was a bachelor,
fairly well-to-do, with a good cellar and a better library, his house
was a pleasant goal for a man who was in need of a brisk walk.  Twice a
week, then, the medical student would swing out there along the dark
country roads, and spend a pleasant hour in Peterson's comfortable
study, discussing, over a glass of old port, the gossip of the 'varsity
or the latest developments of medicine or of surgery.

On the day which followed his interview with Monkhouse Lee, Smith shut
up his books at a quarter past eight, the hour when he usually started
for his friend's house.  As he was leaving his room, however, his eyes
chanced to fall upon one of the books which Bellingham had lent him,
and his conscience pricked him for not having returned it.  However
repellent the man might be, he should not be treated with discourtesy.
Taking the book, he walked downstairs and knocked at his neighbour's
door.  There was no answer; but on turning the handle he found that it
was unlocked.  Pleased at the thought of avoiding an interview, he
stepped inside, and placed the book with his card upon the table.

The lamp was turned half down, but Smith could see the details of the
room plainly enough.  It was all much as he had seen it before--the
frieze, the animal-headed gods, the banging crocodile, and the table
littered over with papers and dried leaves.  The mummy case stood
upright against the wall, but the mummy itself was missing.  There was
no sign of any second occupant of the room, and he felt as he withdrew
that he had probably done Bellingham an injustice.  Had he a guilty
secret to preserve, he would hardly leave his door open so that all the
world might enter.

The spiral stair was as black as pitch, and Smith was slowly making his
way down its irregular steps, when he was suddenly conscious that
something had passed him in the darkness.  There was a faint sound, a
whiff of air, a light brushing past his elbow, but so slight that he
could scarcely be certain of it.  He stopped and listened, but the wind
was rustling among the ivy outside, and he could hear nothing else.

"Is that you, Styles?" he shouted.

There was no answer, and all was still behind him.  It must have been a
sudden gust of air, for there were crannies and cracks in the old
turret.  And yet he could almost have sworn that he heard a footfall by
his very side.  He had emerged into the quadrangle, still turning the
matter over in his head, when a man came running swiftly across the
smooth-cropped lawn.

"Is that you, Smith?"

"Hullo, Hastie!"

"For God's sake come at once!  Young Lee is drowned!  Here's Harrington
of King's with the news.  The doctor is out.  You'll do, but come along
at once.  There may be life in him."

"Have you brandy?"

"No."

"I'll bring some.  There's a flask on my table."

Smith bounded up the stairs, taking three at a time, seized the flask,
and was rushing down with it, when, as he passed Bellingham's room, his
eyes fell upon something which left him gasping and staring upon the
landing.

The door, which he had closed behind him, was now open, and right in
front of him, with the lamp-light shining upon it, was the mummy case.
Three minutes ago it had been empty.  He could swear to that.  Now it
framed the lank body of its horrible occupant, who stood, grim and
stark, with his black shrivelled face towards the door.  The form was
lifeless and inert, but it seemed to Smith as he gazed that there still
lingered a lurid spark of vitality, some faint sign of consciousness in
the little eyes which lurked in the depths of the hollow sockets.  So
astounded and shaken was he that he had forgotten his errand, and was
still staring at the lean, sunken figure when the voice of his friend
below recalled him to himself.

"Come on, Smith!" he shouted.  "It's life and death, you know.  Hurry
up!  Now, then," he added, as the medical student reappeared, "let us
do a sprint.  It is well under a mile, and we should do it in five
minutes.  A human life is better worth running for than a pot."

Neck and neck they dashed through the darkness, and did not pull up
until, panting and spent, they had reached the little cottage by the
river.  Young Lee, limp and dripping like a broken water-plant, was
stretched upon the sofa, the green scum of the river upon his black
hair, and a fringe of white foam upon his leaden-hued lips.  Beside him
knelt his fellow-student Harrington, endeavouring to chafe some warmth
back into his rigid limbs.

"I think there's life in him," said Smith, with his hand to the lad's
side.  "Put your watch glass to his lips.  Yes, there's dimming on it.
You take one arm, Hastie.  Now work it as I do, and we'll soon pull him
round."

For ten minutes they worked in silence, inflating and depressing the
chest of the unconscious man.  At the end of that time a shiver ran
through his body, his lips trembled, and he opened his eyes.  The three
students burst out into an irrepressible cheer.

"Wake up, old chap.  You've frightened us quite enough."

"Have some brandy.  Take a sip from the flask."

"He's all right now," said his companion Harrington.  "Heavens, what a
fright I got!  I was reading here, and he had gone for a stroll as far
as the river, when I heard a scream and a splash.  Out I ran, and by
the time that I could find him and fish him out, all life seemed to
have gone.  Then Simpson couldn't get a doctor, for he has a game-leg,
and I had to run, and I don't know what I'd have done without you
fellows.  That's right, old chap.  Sit up."

Monkhouse Lee had raised himself on his hands, and looked wildly about
him.

"What's up?" he asked.  "I've been in the water.  Ah, yes; I remember."

A look of fear came into his eyes, and he sank his face into his hands.

"How did you fall in?"

"I didn't fall in."

"How, then?"

"I was thrown in.  I was standing by the bank, and something from
behind picked me up like a feather and hurled me in.  I heard nothing,
and I saw nothing.  But I know what it was, for all that."

"And so do I," whispered Smith.

Lee looked up with a quick glance of surprise.  "You've learned, then!"
he said.  "You remember the advice I gave you?"

"Yes, and I begin to think that I shall take it."

"I don't know what the deuce you fellows are talking about," said
Hastie, "but I think, if I were you, Harrington, I should get Lee to
bed at once.  It will be time enough to discuss the why and the
wherefore when he is a little stronger.  I think, Smith, you and I can
leave him alone now.  I am walking back to college; if you are coming
in that direction, we can have a chat."

But it was little chat that they had upon their homeward path.  Smith's
mind was too full of the incidents of the evening, the absence of the
mummy from his neighbour's rooms, the step that passed him on the
stair, the reappearance--the extraordinary, inexplicable reappearance
of the grisly thing--and then this attack upon Lee, corresponding so
closely to the previous outrage upon another man against whom
Bellingham bore a grudge.  All this settled in his thoughts, together
with the many little incidents which had previously turned him against
his neighbour, and the singular circumstances under which he was first
called in to him.  What had been a dim suspicion, a vague, fantastic
conjecture, had suddenly taken form, and stood out in his mind as a
grim fact, a thing not to be denied.  And yet, how monstrous it was!
how unheard of! how entirely beyond all bounds of human experience.  An
impartial judge, or even the friend who walked by his side, would
simply tell him that his eyes had deceived him, that the mummy had been
there all the time, that young Lee had tumbled into the river as any
other man tumbles into a river, and that a blue pill was the best thing
for a disordered liver.  He felt that he would have said as much if the
positions had been reversed.  And yet he could swear that Bellingham
was a murderer at heart, and that he wielded a weapon such as no man
had ever used in all the grim history of crime.

Hastie had branched off to his rooms with a few crisp and emphatic
comments upon his friend's unsociability, and Abercrombie Smith crossed
the quadrangle to his corner turret with a strong feeling of repulsion
for his chambers and their associations.  He would take Lee's advice,
and move his quarters as soon as possible, for how could a man study
when his ear was ever straining for every murmur or footstep in the
room below?  He observed, as he crossed over the lawn, that the light
was still shining in Bellingham's window, and as he passed up the
staircase the door opened, and the man himself looked out at him.  With
his fat, evil face he was like some bloated spider fresh from the
weaving of his poisonous web.

"Good-evening," said he.  "Won't you come in?"

"No," cried Smith, fiercely.

"No?  You are busy as ever?  I wanted to ask you about Lee.  I was
sorry to hear that there was a rumour that something was amiss with
him."

His features were grave, but there was the gleam of a hidden laugh in
his eyes as he spoke.  Smith saw it, and he could have knocked him down
for it.

"You'll be sorrier still to hear that Monkhouse Lee is doing very well,
and is out of all danger," he answered.  "Your hellish tricks have not
come off this time.  Oh, you needn't try to brazen it out.  I know all
about it."

Bellingham took a step back from the angry student, and half-closed the
door as if to protect himself.

"You are mad," he said.  "What do you mean?  Do you assert that I had
anything to do with Lee's accident?"

"Yes," thundered Smith.  "You and that bag of bones behind you; you
worked it between you.  I tell you what it is, Master B., they have
given up burning folk like you, but we still keep a hangman, and, by
George! if any man in this college meets his death while you are here,
I'll have you up, and if you don't swing for it, it won't be my fault.
You'll find that your filthy Egyptian tricks won't answer in England."

"You're a raving lunatic," said Bellingham.

"All right.  You just remember what I say, for you'll find that I'll be
better than my word."

The door slammed, and Smith went fuming up to his chamber, where he
locked the door upon the inside, and spent half the night in smoking
his old briar and brooding over the strange events of the evening.

Next morning Abercrombie Smith heard nothing of his neighbour, but
Harrington called upon him in the afternoon to say that Lee was almost
himself again.  All day Smith stuck fast to his work, but in the
evening he determined to pay the visit to his friend Dr. Peterson upon
which he had started upon the night before.  A good walk and a friendly
chat would be welcome to his jangled nerves.

Bellingham's door was shut as he passed, but glancing back when he was
some distance from the turret, he saw his neighbour's head at the
window outlined against the lamp-light, his face pressed apparently
against the glass as he gazed out into the darkness.  It was a blessing
to be away from all contact with him, but if for a few hours, and Smith
stepped out briskly, and breathed the soft spring air into his lungs.
The half-moon lay in the west between two Gothic pinnacles, and threw
upon the silvered street a dark tracery from the stone-work above.
There was a brisk breeze, and light, fleecy clouds drifted swiftly
across the sky.  Old's was on the very border of the town, and in five
minutes Smith found himself beyond the houses and between the hedges of
a May-scented Oxfordshire lane.

It was a lonely and little frequented road which led to his friend's
house.  Early as it was, Smith did not meet a single soul upon his way.
He walked briskly along until he came to the avenue gate, which opened
into the long gravel drive leading up to Farlingford.  In front of him
he could see the cosy red light of the windows glimmering through the
foliage.  He stood with his hand upon the iron latch of the swinging
gate, and he glanced back at the road along which he had come.
Something was coming swiftly down it.

It moved in the shadow of the hedge, silently and furtively, a dark,
crouching figure, dimly visible against the black background.  Even as
he gazed back at it, it had lessened its distance by twenty paces, and
was fast closing upon him.  Out of the darkness he had a glimpse of a
scraggy neck, and of two eyes that will ever haunt him in his dreams.
He turned, and with a cry of terror he ran for his life up the avenue.
There were the red lights, the signals of safety, almost within a
stone's throw of him.  He was a famous runner, but never had he run as
he ran that night.

The heavy gate had swung into place behind him, but he heard it dash
open again before his pursuer.  As he rushed madly and wildly through
the night, he could hear a swift, dry patter behind him, and could see,
as he threw back a glance, that this horror was bounding like a tiger
at his heels, with blazing eyes and one stringy arm outthrown.  Thank
God, the door was ajar.  He could see the thin bar of light which shot
from the lamp in the hall.  Nearer yet sounded the clatter from behind.
He heard a hoarse gurgling at his very shoulder.  With a shriek he
flung himself against the door, slammed and bolted it behind him, and
sank half-fainting on to the hall chair.

"My goodness, Smith, what's the matter?" asked Peterson, appearing at
the door of his study.

"Give me some brandy!"

Peterson disappeared, and came rushing out again with a glass and a
decanter.

"You need it," he said, as his visitor drank off what he poured out for
him.  "Why, man, you are as white as a cheese."

Smith laid down his glass, rose up, and took a deep breath.

"I am my own man again now," said he.  "I was never so unmanned before.
But, with your leave, Peterson, I will sleep here to-night, for I don't
think I could face that road again except by daylight.  It's weak, I
know, but I can't help it."

Peterson looked at his visitor with a very questioning eye.

"Of course you shall sleep here if you wish.  I'll tell Mrs. Burney to
make up the spare bed.  Where are you off to now?"

"Come up with me to the window that overlooks the door.  I want you to
see what I have seen."

They went up to the window of the upper hall whence they could look
down upon the approach to the house.  The drive and the fields on
either side lay quiet and still, bathed in the peaceful moonlight.

"Well, really, Smith," remarked Peterson, "it is well that I know you
to be an abstemious man.  What in the world can have frightened you?"

"I'll tell you presently.  But where can it have gone?  Ah, now look,
look!  See the curve of the road just beyond your gate."

"Yes, I see; you needn't pinch my arm off.  I saw someone pass.  I
should say a man, rather thin, apparently, and tall, very tall.  But
what of him?  And what of yourself?  You are still shaking like an
aspen leaf."

"I have been within hand-grip of the devil, that's all.  But come down
to your study, and I shall tell you the whole story."

He did so.  Under the cheery lamplight, with a glass of wine on the
table beside him, and the portly form and florid face of his friend in
front, he narrated, in their order, all the events, great and small,
which had formed so singular a chain, from the night on which he had
found Bellingham fainting in front of the mummy case until his horrid
experience of an hour ago.

"There now," he said as he concluded, "that's the whole black business.
It is monstrous and incredible, but it is true."

Dr. Plumptree Peterson sat for some time in silence with a very puzzled
expression upon his face.

"I never heard of such a thing in my life, never!" he said at last.
"You have told me the facts.  Now tell me your inferences."

"You can draw your own."

"But I should like to hear yours.  You have thought over the matter,
and I have not."

"Well, it must be a little vague in detail, but the main points seem to
me to be clear enough.  This fellow Bellingham, in his Eastern studies,
has got hold of some infernal secret by which a mummy--or possibly only
this particular mummy--can be temporarily brought to life.  He was
trying this disgusting business on the night when he fainted.  No doubt
the sight of the creature moving had shaken his nerve, even though he
had expected it.  You remember that almost the first words he said were
to call out upon himself as a fool.  Well, he got more hardened
afterwards, and carried the matter through without fainting.  The
vitality which he could put into it was evidently only a passing thing,
for I have seen it continually in its case as dead as this table.  He
has some elaborate process, I fancy, by which he brings the thing to
pass.  Having done it, he naturally bethought him that he might use the
creature as an agent.  It has intelligence and it has strength.  For
some purpose he took Lee into his confidence; but Lee, like a decent
Christian, would have nothing to do with such a business.  Then they
had a row, and Lee vowed that he would tell his sister of Bellingham's
true character.  Bellingham's game was to prevent him, and he nearly
managed it, by setting this creature of his on his track.  He had
already tried its powers upon another man--Norton--towards whom he had
a grudge.  It is the merest chance that he has not two murders upon his
soul.  Then, when I taxed him with the matter, he had the strongest
reasons for wishing to get me out of the way before I could convey my
knowledge to anyone else.  He got his chance when I went out, for he
knew my habits, and where I was bound for.  I have had a narrow shave,
Peterson, and it is mere luck you didn't find me on your doorstep in
the morning.  I'm not a nervous man as a rule, and I never thought to
have the fear of death put upon me as it was to-night."

"My dear boy, you take the matter too seriously," said his companion.
"Your nerves are out of order with your work, and you make too much of
it.  How could such a thing as this stride about the streets of Oxford,
even at night, without being seen?"

"It has been seen.  There is quite a scare in the town about an escaped
ape, as they imagine the creature to be.  It is the talk of the place."

"Well, it's a striking chain of events.  And yet, my dear fellow, you
must allow that each incident in itself is capable of a more natural
explanation."

"What! even my adventure of to-night?"

"Certainly.  You come out with your nerves all unstrung, and your head
full of this theory of yours.  Some gaunt, half-famished tramp steals
after you, and seeing you run, is emboldened to pursue you.  Your fears
and imagination do the rest."

"It won't do, Peterson; it won't do."

"And again, in the instance of your finding the mummy case empty, and
then a few moments later with an occupant, you know that it was
lamplight, that the lamp was half turned down, and that you had no
special reason to look hard at the case.  It is quite possible that you
may have overlooked the creature in the first instance."

"No, no; it is out of the question."

"And then Lee may have fallen into the river, and Norton been
garrotted.  It is certainly a formidable indictment that  you have
against Bellingham; but if you were to place it before a police
magistrate, he would simply laugh in your face."

"I know he would.  That is why I mean to take the matter into my own
hands."

"Eh?"

"Yes; I feel that a public duty rests upon me, and, besides, I must do
it for my own safety, unless I choose to allow myself to be hunted by
this beast out of the college, and that would be a little too feeble.
I have quite made up my mind what I shall do.  And first of all, may I
use your paper and pens for an hour?"

"Most certainly.  You will find all that you want upon that side table."

Abercrombie Smith sat down before a sheet of foolscap, and for an hour,
and then for a second hour his pen travelled swiftly over it.  Page
after page was finished and tossed aside while his friend leaned back
in his arm-chair, looking across at him with patient curiosity.  At
last, with an exclamation of satisfaction, Smith sprang to his feet,
gathered his papers up into order, and laid the last one upon
Peterson's desk.

"Kindly sign this as a witness," he said.

"A witness?  Of what?"

"Of my signature, and of the date.  The date is the most important.
Why, Peterson, my life might hang upon it."

"My dear Smith, you are talking wildly.  Let me beg you to go to bed."

"On the contrary, I never spoke so deliberately in my life.  And I will
promise to go to bed the moment you have signed it."

"But what is it?"

"It is a statement of all that I have been telling you to-night.  I
wish you to witness it."

"Certainly," said Peterson, signing his name under that of his
companion.  "There you are!  But what is the idea?"

"You will kindly retain it, and produce it in case I am arrested."

"Arrested?  For what?"

"For murder.  It is quite on the cards.  I wish to be ready for every
event.  There is only one course open to me, and I am determined to
take it."

"For Heaven's sake, don't do anything rash!"

"Believe me, it would be far more rash to adopt any other course.  I
hope that we won't need to bother you, but it will ease my mind to know
that you have this statement of my motives.  And now I am ready to take
your advice and to go to roost, for I want to be at my best in the
morning."


Abercrombie Smith was not an entirely pleasant man to have as an enemy.
Slow and easytempered, he was formidable when driven to action.  He
brought to every purpose in life the same deliberate resoluteness which
had distinguished him as a scientific student.  He had laid his studies
aside for a day, but he intended that the day should not be wasted.
Not a word did he say to his host as to his plans, but by nine o'clock
he was well on his way to Oxford.

In the High Street he stopped at Clifford's, the gun-maker's, and
bought a heavy revolver, with a box of central-fire cartridges.  Six of
them he slipped into the chambers, and half-cocking the weapon, placed
it in the pocket of his coat.  He then made his way to Hastie's rooms,
where the big oarsman was lounging over his breakfast, with the
Sporting Times propped up against the coffeepot.

"Hullo!  What's up?" he asked.  "Have some coffee?"

"No, thank you.  I want you to come with me, Hastie, and do what I ask
you."

"Certainly, my boy."

"And bring a heavy stick with you."

"Hullo!" Hastie stared.  "Here's a hunting-crop that would fell an ox."

"One other thing.  You have a box of amputating knives.  Give me the
longest of them."

"There you are.  You seem to be fairly on the war trail.  Anything
else?"

"No; that will do." Smith placed the knife inside his coat, and led the
way to the quadrangle.  "We are neither of us chickens, Hastie," said
he.  "I think I can do this job alone, but I take you as a precaution.
I am going to have a little talk with Bellingham.  If I have only him
to deal with, I won't, of course, need you.  If I shout, however, up
you come, and lam out with your whip as hard as you can lick.  Do you
understand?"

"All right.  I'll come if I hear you bellow."

"Stay here, then.  It may be a little time, but don't budge until I
come down."

"I'm a fixture."

Smith ascended the stairs, opened Bellingham's door and stepped in.
Bellingham was seated behind his table, writing.  Beside him, among his
litter of strange possessions, towered the mummy case, with its sale
number 249 still stuck upon its front, and its hideous occupant stiff
and stark within it.  Smith looked very deliberately round him, closed
the door, locked it, took the key from the inside, and then stepping
across to the fireplace, struck a match and set the fire alight.
Bellingham sat staring, with amazement and rage upon his bloated face.

"Well, really now, you make yourself at home," he gasped.

Smith sat himself deliberately down, placing his watch upon the table,
drew out his pistol, cocked it, and laid it in his lap.  Then he took
the long amputating knife from his bosom, and threw it down in front of
Bellingham.

"Now, then," said he, "just get to work and cut up that mummy."

"Oh, is that it?" said Bellingham with a sneer.

"Yes, that is it.  They tell me that the law can't touch you.  But I
have a law that will set matters straight.  If in five minutes you have
not set to work, I swear by the God who made me that I will put a
bullet through your brain!"

"You would murder me?"

Bellingham had half risen, and his face was the colour of putty.

"Yes."

"And for what?"

"To stop your mischief.  One minute has gone."

"But what have I done?"

"I know and you know."

"This is mere bullying."

"Two minutes are gone."

"But you must give reasons.  You are a madman--a dangerous madman.  Why
should I destroy my own property?  It is a valuable mummy."

"You must cut it up, and you must burn it."

"I will do no such thing."

"Four minutes are gone."

Smith took up the pistol and he looked towards Bellingham with an
inexorable face.  As the second-hand stole round, he raised his hand,
and the finger twitched upon the trigger.

"There! there! I'll do it!" screamed Bellingham.

In frantic haste he caught up the knife and hacked at the figure of the
mummy, ever glancing round to see the eye and the weapon of his
terrible visitor bent upon him.  The creature crackled and snapped
under every stab of the keen blade.  A thick yellow dust rose up from
it.  Spices and dried essences rained down upon the floor.  Suddenly,
with a rending crack, its backbone snapped asunder, and it fell, a
brown heap of sprawling limbs, upon the floor.

"Now into the fire!" said Smith.

The flames leaped and roared as the dried and tinderlike debris was
piled upon it.  The little room was like the stoke-hole of a steamer
and the sweat ran down the faces of the two men; but still the one
stooped and worked, while the other sat watching him with a set face.
A thick, fat smoke oozed out from the fire, and a heavy smell of burned
rosin and singed hair filled the air.  In a quarter of an hour a few
charred and brittle sticks were all that was left of Lot No. 249.

"Perhaps that will satisfy you," snarled Bellingham, with hate and fear
in his little grey eyes as he glanced back at his tormenter.

"No; I must make a clean sweep of all your materials.  We must have no
more devil's tricks.  In with all these leaves!  They may have
something to do with it."

"And what now?" asked Bellingham, when the leaves also had been added
to the blaze.

"Now the roll of papyrus which you had on the table that night.  It is
in that drawer, I think."

"No, no," shouted Bellingham.  "Don't burn that!  Why, man, you don't
know what you do.  It is unique; it contains wisdom which is nowhere
else to be found."

"Out with it!"

"But look here, Smith, you can't really mean it.  I'll share the
knowledge with you.  I'll teach you all that is in it.  Or, stay, let
me only copy it before you burn it!"

Smith stepped forward and turned the key in the drawer.  Taking out the
yellow, curled roll of paper, he threw it into the fire, and pressed it
down with his heel.  Bellingham screamed, and grabbed at it; but Smith
pushed him back, and stood over it until it was reduced to a formless
grey ash.

"Now, Master B.," said he, "I think I have pretty well drawn your
teeth.  You'll hear from me again, if you return to your old tricks.
And now good-morning, for I must go back to my studies."

And such is the narrative of Abercrombie Smith as to the singular
events which occurred in Old College, Oxford, in the spring of '84.  As
Bellingham left the university immediately afterwards, and was last
heard of in the Soudan, there is no one who can contradict his
statement.  But the wisdom of men is small, and the ways of nature are
strange, and who shall put a bound to the dark things which may be
found by those who seek for them?




THE LOS AMIGOS FIASCO.

I used to be the leading practitioner of Los Amigos.  Of course,
everyone has heard of the great electrical generating gear there.  The
town is wide spread, and there are dozens of little townlets and
villages all round, which receive their supply from the same centre, so
that the works are on a very large scale.  The Los Amigos folk say that
they are the largest upon earth, but then we claim that for everything
in Los Amigos except the gaol and the death-rate.  Those are said to be
the smallest.

Now, with so fine an electrical supply, it seemed to be a sinful waste
of hemp that the Los Amigos criminals should perish in the
old-fashioned manner.  And then came the news of the eleotrocutions in
the East, and how the results had not after all been so instantaneous
as had been hoped.  The Western Engineers raised their eyebrows when
they read of the puny shocks by which these men had perished, and they
vowed in Los Amigos that when an irreclaimable came their way he should
be dealt handsomely by, and have the run of all the big dynamos.  There
should be no reserve, said the engineers, but he should have all that
they had got.  And what the result of that would be none could predict,
save that it must be absolutely blasting and deadly.  Never before had
a man been so charged with electricity as they would charge him.  He
was to be smitten by the essence of ten thunderbolts.  Some prophesied
combustion, and some disintegration and disappearance.   They were
waiting eagerly to settle the question by actual demonstration, and it
was just at that moment that Duncan Warner came that way.

Warner had been wanted by the law, and by nobody else, for many years.
Desperado, murderer, train robber and road agent, he was a man beyond
the pale of human pity.  He had deserved a dozen deaths, and the Los
Amigos folk grudged him so gaudy a one as that.  He seemed to feel
himself to be unworthy of it, for he made two frenzied attempts at
escape.  He was a powerful, muscular man, with a lion head, tangled
black locks, and a sweeping beard which covered his broad chest.  When
he was tried, there was no finer head in all the crowded court.  It's
no new thing to find the best face looking from the dock.  But his good
looks could not balance his bad deeds.  His advocate did all he knew,
but the cards lay against him, and Duncan Warner was handed over to the
mercy of the big Los Amigos dynamos.

I was there at the committee meeting when the matter was discussed.
The town council had chosen four experts to look after the
arrangements.  Three of them  were admirable.  There was Joseph
M'Conner, the very man who had designed the dynamos, and there was
Joshua Westmacott, the chairman of the Los Amigos Electrical Supply
Company, Limited.  Then there was myself as the chief medical man, and
lastly an old German of the name of Peter Stulpnagel.  The Germans were
a strong body at Los Amigos, and they all voted for their man.  That
was how he got on the committee.  It was said that he had been a
wonderful electrician at home, and he was eternally working with wires
and insulators and Leyden jars; but, as he never seemed to get any
further, or to have any results worth publishing he came at last to be
regarded as a harmless crank, who had made science his hobby.  We three
practical men smiled when we heard that he had been elected as our
colleague, and at the meeting we fixed it all up very nicely among
ourselves without much thought of the old fellow who sat with his ears
scooped forward in his hands, for he was a trifle hard of hearing,
taking no more part in the proceedings than the gentlemen of the press
who scribbled their notes on the back benches.

We did not take long to settle it all.  In New York a strength of some
two thousand volts had been used, and death had not been instantaneous.
Evidently their shock had been too weak.  Los Amigos should not fall
into that error.  The charge should be six times greater, and
therefore, of course, it would be six times more effective.  Nothing
could possibly be more logical.  The whole concentrated force of the
great dynamos should be employed on Duncan Warner.

So we three settled it, and had already risen to break up the meeting,
when our silent companion opened his month for the first time.

"Gentlemen," said he, "you appear to me to show an extraordinary
ignorance upon the subject of electricity.  You have not mastered the
first principles of its actions upon a human being."

The committee was about to break into an angry reply to this brusque
comment, but the chairman of the Electrical Company tapped his forehead
to claim its indulgence for the crankiness of the speaker.

"Pray tell us, sir," said he, with an ironical smile, "what is there in
our conclusions with which you find fault?"

"With your assumption that a large dose of electricity will merely
increase the effect of a small dose.  Do you not think it possible that
it might have an entirely different result?  Do you know anything, by
actual experiment, of the effect of such powerful shocks?"

"We know it by analogy," said the chairman, pompously.  "All drugs
increase their effect when they increase their dose; for example--for
example----"

"Whisky," said Joseph M'Connor.

"Quite so.  Whisky.  You see it there."

Peter Stulpnagel smiled and shook his head.

"Your argument is not very good," said he.  "When I used to take
whisky, I used to find that one glass would excite me, but that six
would send me to sleep, which is just the opposite.  Now, suppose that
electricity were to act in just the opposite way also, what then?"

We three practical men burst out laughing.  We had known that our
colleague was queer, but we never had thought that he would be as queer
as this.

"What then?" repeated Philip Stulpnagel.

"We'll take our chances," said the chairman.

"Pray consider," said Peter, "that workmen who have touched the wires,
and who have received shocks of only a few hundred volts, have died
instantly.  The fact is well known.  And yet when a much greater force
was used upon a criminal at New York, the man struggled for some little
time.  Do you not clearly see that the smaller dose is the more deadly?"

"I think, gentlemen, that this discussion has been carried on quite
long enough," said the chairman, rising again.  "The point, I take it,
has already been decided by the majority of the committee, and Duncan
Warner shall be electrocuted on Tuesday by the full strength of the Los
Amigos dynamos.  Is it not so?"

"I agree," said Joseph M'Connor.

"I agree," said I.

"And I protest," said Peter Stulpnagel.

"Then the motion is carried, and your protest will be duly entered in
the minutes," said the chairman, and so the sitting was dissolved.

The attendance at the electrocution was a very small one.  We four
members of the committee were, of course, present with the executioner,
who was to act under their orders.  The others were the United States
Marshal, the governor of the gaol, the chaplain, and three members of
the press.  The room was a small brick chamber, forming an outhouse to
the Central Electrical station.  It had been used as a laundry, and had
an oven and copper at one side, but no other furniture save a single
chair for the condemned man.  A metal plate for his feet was placed in
front of it, to which ran a thick, insulated wire.  Above, another wire
depended from the ceiling, which could be connected with a small
metallic rod projecting from a cap which was to be placed upon his
head.  When this connection was established Duncan Warner's hour was
come.

There was a solemn hush as we waited for the coming of the prisoner.
The practical engineers looked a little pale, and fidgeted nervously
with the wires.  Even the hardened Marshal was ill at ease, for a mere
hanging was one thing, and this blasting of flesh and blood a very
different one.  As to the pressmen, their faces were whiter than the
sheets which lay before them.  The only man who appeared to feel none
of the influence of these preparations was the little German crank, who
strolled from one to the other with a smile on his lips and mischief in
his eyes.  More than once he even went so far as to burst into a shout
of laughter, until the chaplain sternly rebuked him for his ill-timed
levity.

"How can you so far forget yourself, Mr. Stulpnagel," said he, "as to
jest in the presence of death?"

But the German was quite unabashed.

"If I were in the presence of death I should not jest," said he, "but
since I am not I may do what I choose."

This flippant reply was about to draw another and a sterner reproof
from the chaplain, when the door was swung open and two warders entered
leading Duncan Warner between them.  He glanced round him with a set
face, stepped resolutely forward, and seated himself upon the chair.

"Touch her off!" said he.

It was barbarous to keep him in suspense.  The chaplain murmured a few
words in his ear, the attendant placed the cap upon his head, and then,
while we all held our breath, the wire and the metal were brought in
contact.

"Great Scott!" shouted Duncan Warner.

He had bounded in his chair as the frightful shock crashed through his
system.  But he was not dead.  On the contrary, his eyes gleamed far
more brightly than they had done before.  There was only one change,
but it was a singular one.  The black had passed from his hair and
beard as the shadow passes from a landscape.  They were both as white
as snow.  And yet there was no other sign of decay.  His skin was
smooth and plump and lustrous as a child's.

The Marshal looked at the committee with a reproachful eye.

"There seems to be some hitch here, gentlemen," said he.

We three practical men looked at each other.

Peter Stulpnagel smiled pensively.

"I think that another one should do it," said I.

Again the connection was made, and again Duncan Warner sprang in his
chair and shouted, but, indeed, were it not that he still remained in
the chair none of us would have recognised him.  His hair and his beard
had shredded off in an instant, and the room looked like a barber's
shop on a Saturday night.  There he sat, his eyes still shining, his
skin radiant with the glow of perfect health, but with a scalp as bald
as a Dutch cheese, and a chin without so much as a trace of down.  He
began to revolve one of his arms, slowly and doubtfully at first, but
with more confidence as he went on.

"That jint," said he, "has puzzled half the doctors on the Pacific
Slope.  It's as good as new, and as limber as a hickory twig."

"You are feeling pretty well?" asked the old German.

"Never better in my life," said Duncan Warner cheerily.

The situation was a painful one.  The Marshal glared at the committee.
Peter Stulpnagel grinned and rubbed his hands.  The engineers scratched
their heads.  The bald-headed prisoner revolved his arm and looked
pleased.

"I think that one more shock----" began the chairman.

"No, sir," said the Marshal "we've had foolery enough for one morning.
We are here for an execution, and a execution we'll have."

"What do you propose?"

"There's a hook handy upon the ceiling.  Fetch in a rope, and we'll
soon set this matter straight."

There was another awkward delay while the warders departed for the
cord.  Peter Stulpnagel bent over Duncan Warner, and whispered
something in his ear.  The desperado started in surprise.

"You don't say?" he asked.

The German nodded.

"What!  Noways?"

Peter shook his head, and the two began to laugh as though they shared
some huge joke between them.

The rope was brought, and the Marshal himself slipped the noose over
the criminal's neck.  Then the two warders, the assistant and he swung
their victim into the air.  For half an hour he hung--a dreadful
sight--from the ceiling.  Then in solemn silence they lowered him down,
and one of the warders went out to order the shell to be brought round.
But as he touched ground again what was our amazement when Duncan
Warner put his hands up to his neck, loosened the noose, and took a
long, deep breath.

"Paul Jefferson's sale is goin' well," he remarked, "I could see the
crowd from up yonder," and he nodded at the hook in the ceiling.

"Up with him again!" shouted the Marshal, "we'll get the life out of
him somehow."

In an instant the victim was up at the hook once more.

They kept him there for an hour, but when he came down he was perfectly
garrulous.

"Old man Plunket goes too much to the Arcady Saloon," said he.  "Three
times he's been there in an hour; and him with a family.  Old man
Plunket would do well to swear off."

It was monstrous and incredible, but there it was.  There was no
getting round it.  The man was there talking when he ought to have been
dead.  We all sat staring in amazement, but United States Marshal
Carpenter was not a man to be euchred so easily.  He motioned the
others to one side, so that the prisoner was left standing alone.

"Duncan Warner," said he, slowly, "you are here to play your part, and
I am here to play mine.  Your game is to live if you can, and my game
is to carry out the sentence of the law.  You've beat us on
electricity.  I'll give you one there.  And you've beat us on hanging,
for you seem to thrive on it.  But it's my turn to beat you now, for my
duty has to be done."

He pulled a six-shooter from his coat as he spoke, and fired all the
shots through the body of the prisoner.  The room was so filled with
smoke that we could see nothing, but when it cleared the prisoner was
still standing there, looking down in disgust at the front of his coat.

"Coats must be cheap where you come from," said he.  "Thirty dollars it
cost me, and look at it now.  The six holes in front are bad enough,
but four of the balls have passed out, and a pretty state the back must
be in."

The Marshal's revolver fell from his hand, and he dropped his arms to
his sides, a beaten man.

"Maybe some of you gentlemen can tell me what this means," said he,
looking helplessly at the committee.

Peter Stulpnagel took a step forward.

"I'll tell you all about it," said he.

"You seem to be the only person who knows anything."

"I <i>am</i> the only person who knows anything.  I should have warned these
gentlemen; but, as they would not listen to me, I have allowed them to
learn by experience.  What you have done with your electricity is that
you have increased this man's vitality until he can defy death for
centuries."

"Centuries!"

"Yes, it will take the wear of hundreds of years to exhaust the
enormous nervous energy with which you have drenched him.  Electricity
is life, and you have charged him with it to the utmost.  Perhaps in
fifty years you might execute him, but I am not sanguine about it."

"Great Scott!  What shall I do with him?" cried the unhappy Marshal.

Peter Stulpnagel shrugged his shoulders.

"It seems to me that it does not much matter what you do with him now,"
said he.

"Maybe we could drain the electricity out of him again.  Suppose we
hang him up by the heels?"

"No, no, it's out of the question."

"Well, well, he shall do no more mischief in Los Amigos, anyhow," said
the Marshal, with decision.  "He shall go into the new gaol.  The
prison will wear him out."

"On the contrary," said Peter Stulpnagel, "I think that it is much more
probable that he will wear out the prison."

It was rather a fiasco and for years we didn't talk more about it than
we could help, but it's no secret now and I thought you might like to
jot down the facts in your case-book.




THE DOCTORS OF HOYLAND.

Dr. James Ripley was always looked upon as an exceedingly lucky dog by
all of the profession who knew him.  His father had preceded him in a
practice in the village of Hoyland, in the north of Hampshire, and all
was ready for him on the very first day that the law allowed him to put
his name at the foot of a prescription.  In a few years the old
gentleman retired, and settled on the South Coast, leaving his son in
undisputed possession of the whole country side.  Save for Dr. Horton,
near Basingstoke, the young surgeon had a clear run of six miles in
every direction, and took his fifteen hundred pounds a year, though, as
is usual in country practices, the stable swallowed up most of what the
consulting-room earned.

Dr. James Ripley was two-and-thirty years of age, reserved, learned,
unmarried, with set, rather stern features, and a thinning of the dark
hair upon the top of his head, which was worth quite a hundred a year
to him.  He was particularly happy in his management of ladies.  He had
caught the tone of bland sternness and decisive suavity which dominates
without offending.  Ladies, however, were not equally happy in their
management of him.  Professionally, he was always at their service.
Socially, he was a drop of quicksilver.  In vain the country mammas
spread out their simple lures in front of him.  Dances and picnics were
not to his taste, and he preferred during his scanty leisure to shut
himself up in his study, and to bury himself in Virchow's Archives and
the professional journals.

Study was a passion with him, and he would have none of the rust which
often gathers round a country practitioner.  It was his ambition to
keep his knowledge as fresh and bright as at the moment when he had
stepped out of the examination hall.  He prided himself on being able
at a moment's notice to rattle off the seven ramifications of some
obscure artery, or to give the exact percentage of any physiological
compound.  After a long day's work he would sit up half the night
performing iridectomies and extractions upon the sheep's eyes sent in
by the village butcher, to the horror of his housekeeper, who had to
remove the debris next morning.  His love for his work was the one
fanaticism which found a place in his dry, precise nature.

It was the more to his credit that he should keep up to date in his
knowledge, since he had no competition to force him to exertion.  In
the seven years during which he had practised in Hoyland three rivals
had pitted themselves against him, two in the village itself and one in
the neighbouring hamlet of Lower Hoyland.  Of these one had sickened
and wasted, being, as it was said, himself the only patient whom he had
treated during his eighteen months of ruralising.  A second had bought
a fourth share of a Basingstoke practice, and had departed honourably,
while a third had vanished one September night, leaving a gutted house
and an unpaid drug bill behind him.  Since then the district had become
a monopoly, and no one had dared to measure himself against the
established fame of the Hoyland doctor.

It was, then, with a feeling of some surprise and considerable
curiosity that on driving through Lower Hoyland one morning he
perceived that the new house at the end of the village was occupied,
and that a virgin brass plate glistened upon the swinging gate which
faced the high road.  He pulled up his fifty guinea chestnut mare and
took a good look at it.  "Verrinder Smith, M. D.," was printed across
it in very neat, small lettering.  The last man had had letters half a
foot long, with a lamp like a fire-station.  Dr. James Ripley noted the
difference, and deduced from it that the new-comer might possibly prove
a more formidable opponent.  He was convinced of it that evening when
he came to consult the current medical directory.  By it he learned
that Dr. Verrinder Smith was the holder of superb degrees, that he had
studied with distinction at Edinburgh, Paris, Berlin, and Vienna, and
finally that he had been awarded a gold medal and the Lee Hopkins
scholarship for original research, in recognition of an exhaustive
inquiry into the functions of the anterior spinal nerve roots.  Dr.
Ripley passed his fingers through his thin hair in bewilderment as he
read his rival's record.  What on earth could so brilliant a man mean
by putting up his plate in a little Hampshire hamlet.

But Dr. Ripley furnished himself with an explanation to the riddle.  No
doubt Dr. Verrinder Smith had simply come down there in order to pursue
some scientific research in peace and quiet.  The plate was up as an
address rather than as an invitation to patients.  Of course, that must
be the true explanation.  In that case the presence of this brilliant
neighbour would be a splendid thing for his own studies.  He had often
longed for some kindred mind, some steel on which he might strike his
flint.  Chance had brought it to him, and he rejoiced exceedingly.

And this joy it was which led him to take a step which was quite at
variance with his usual habits.  It is the custom for a new-comer among
medical men to call first upon the older, and the etiquette upon the
subject is strict.  Dr. Ripley was pedantically exact on such points,
and yet he deliberately drove over next day and called upon Dr.
Verrinder Smith.  Such a waiving of ceremony was, he felt, a gracious
act upon his part, and a fit prelude to the intimate relations which he
hoped to establish with his neighbour.

The house was neat and well appointed, and Dr. Ripley was shown by a
smart maid into a dapper little consulting room.  As he passed in he
noticed two or three parasols and a lady's sun bonnet hanging in the
hall.  It was a pity that his colleague should be a married man.  It
would put them upon a different footing, and interfere with those long
evenings of high scientific talk which he had pictured to himself.  On
the other hand, there was much in the consulting room to please him.
Elaborate instruments, seen more often in hospitals than in the houses
of private practitioners, were scattered about.  A sphygmograph stood
upon the table and a gasometer-like engine, which was new to Dr.
Ripley, in the corner.  A book-case full of ponderous volumes in French
and German, paper-covered for the most part, and varying in tint from
the shell to the yoke of a duck's egg, caught his wandering eyes, and
he was deeply absorbed in their titles when the door opened suddenly
behind him.  Turning round, he found himself facing a little woman,
whose plain, palish face was remarkable only for a pair of shrewd,
humorous eyes of a blue which had two shades too much green in it.  She
held a pince-nez in her left hand, and the doctor's card in her right.

"How do you do, Dr. Ripley?" said she.

"How do you do, madam?" returned the visitor.  "Your husband is perhaps
out?"

"I am not married," said she simply.

"Oh, I beg your pardon!  I meant the doctor--Dr. Verrinder Smith."

"I am Dr. Verrinder Smith."

Dr. Ripley was so surprised that he dropped his hat and forgot to pick
it up again.

"What!" he grasped, "the Lee Hopkins prizeman!  You!"

He had never seen a woman doctor before, and his whole conservative
soul rose up in revolt at the idea.  He could not recall any Biblical
injunction that the man should remain ever the doctor and the woman the
nurse, and yet he felt as if a blasphemy had been committed.  His face
betrayed his feelings only too clearly.

"I am sorry to disappoint you," said the lady drily.

"You certainly have surprised me," he answered, picking up his hat.

"You are not among our champions, then?"

"I cannot say that the movement has my approval."

"And why?"

"I should much prefer not to discuss it."

"But I am sure you will answer a lady's question."

"Ladies are in danger of losing their privileges when they usurp the
place of the other sex.  They cannot claim both."

"Why should a woman not earn her bread by her brains?"

Dr. Ripley felt irritated by the quiet manner in which the lady
cross-questioned him.

"I should much prefer not to be led into a discussion, Miss Smith."

"Dr. Smith," she interrupted.

"Well, Dr. Smith!  But if you insist upon an answer, I must say that I
do not think medicine a suitable profession for women and that I have a
personal objection to masculine ladies."

It was an exceedingly rude speech, and he was ashamed of it the instant
after he had made it.  The lady, however, simply raised her eyebrows
and smiled.

"It seems to me that you are begging the question," said she.  "Of
course, if it makes women masculine that <i>would</i> be a considerable
deterioration."

It was a neat little counter, and Dr. Ripley, like a pinked fencer,
bowed his acknowledgment.

"I must go," said he.

"I am sorry that we cannot come to some more friendly conclusion since
we are to be neighbours," she remarked.

He bowed again, and took a step towards the door.

"It was a singular coincidence," she continued, "that at the instant
that you called I was reading your paper on 'Locomotor Ataxia,' in the
Lancet."

"Indeed," said he drily.

"I thought it was a very able monograph."

"You are very good."

"But the views which you attribute to Professor Pitres, of Bordeaux,
have been repudiated by him."

"I have his pamphlet of 1890," said Dr. Ripley angrily.

"Here is his pamphlet of 1891." She picked it from among a litter of
periodicals.  "If you have time to glance your eye down this
passage----"

Dr. Ripley took it from her and shot rapidly through the paragraph
which she indicated.  There was no denying that it completely knocked
the bottom out of his own article.  He threw it down, and with another
frigid bow he made for the door.  As he took the reins from the groom
he glanced round and saw that the lady was standing at her window, and
it seemed to him that she was laughing heartily.

All day the memory of this interview haunted him.  He felt that he had
come very badly out of it.  She had showed herself to be his superior
on his own pet subject.  She had been courteous while he had been rude,
self-possessed when he had been angry.  And then, above all, there was
her presence, her monstrous intrusion to rankle in his mind.  A woman
doctor had been an abstract thing before, repugnant but distant.  Now
she was there in actual practice, with a brass plate up just like his
own, competing for the same patients.  Not that he feared competition,
but he objected to this lowering of his ideal of womanhood.  She could
not be more than thirty, and had a bright, mobile face, too.  He
thought of her humorous eyes, and of her strong, well-turned chin.  It
revolted him the more to recall the details of her education.  A man,
of course, could come through such an ordeal with all his purity, but
it was nothing short of shameless in a woman.

But it was not long before he learned that even her competition was a
thing to be feared.  The novelty of her presence had brought a few
curious invalids into her consulting rooms, and, once there, they had
been so impressed by the firmness of her manner and by the singular,
new-fashioned instruments with which she tapped, and peered, and
sounded, that it formed the core of their conversation for weeks
afterwards.  And soon there were tangible proofs of her powers upon the
country side.  Farmer Eyton, whose callous ulcer had been quietly
spreading over his shin for years back under a gentle regime of zinc
ointment, was painted round with blistering fluid, and found, after
three blasphemous nights, that his sore was stimulated into healing.
Mrs. Crowder, who had always regarded the birthmark upon her second
daughter Eliza as a sign of the indignation of the Creator at a third
helping of raspberry tart which she had partaken of during a critical
period, learned that, with the help of two galvanic needles, the
mischief was not irreparable.  In a month Dr. Verrinder Smith was
known, and in two she was famous.

Occasionally, Dr. Ripley met her as he drove upon his rounds.  She had
started a high dogcart, taking the reins herself, with a little tiger
behind.  When they met he invariably raised his hat with punctilious
politeness, but the grim severity of his face showed how formal was the
courtesy.  In fact, his dislike was rapidly deepening into absolute
detestation.  "The unsexed woman," was the description of her which he
permitted himself to give to those of his patients who still remained
staunch.  But, indeed, they were a rapidly-decreasing body, and every
day his pride was galled by the news of some fresh defection.  The lady
had somehow impressed the country folk with almost superstitious belief
in her power, and from far and near they flocked to her consulting room.

But what galled him most of all was, when she did something which he
had pronounced to be impracticable.  For all his knowledge he lacked
nerve as an operator, and usually sent his worst cases up to London.
The lady, however, had no weakness of the sort, and took everything
that came in her way.  It was agony to him to hear that she was about
to straighten little Alec Turner's club foot, and right at the fringe
of the rumour came a note from his mother, the rector's wife, asking
him if he would be so good as to act as chloroformist.  It would be
inhumanity to refuse, as there was no other who could take the place,
but it was gall and wormwood to his sensitive nature.  Yet, in spite of
his vexation, he could not but admire the dexterity with which the
thing was done.  She handled the little wax-like foot so gently, and
held the tiny tenotomy knife as an artist holds his pencil.  One
straight insertion, one snick of a tendon, and it was all over without
a stain upon the white towel which lay beneath.  He had never seen
anything more masterly, and he had the honesty to say so, though her
skill increased his dislike of her.  The operation spread her fame
still further at his expense, and self-preservation was added to his
other grounds for detesting her.  And this very detestation it was
which brought matters to a curious climax.

One winter's night, just as he was rising from his lonely dinner, a
groom came riding down from Squire Faircastle's, the richest man in the
district, to say that his daughter had scalded her hand, and that
medical help was needed on the instant.  The coachman had ridden for
the lady doctor, for it mattered nothing to the Squire who came as long
as it were speedily.  Dr. Ripley rushed from his surgery with the
determination that she should not effect an entrance into this
stronghold of his if hard driving on his part could prevent it.  He did
not even wait to light his lamps, but sprang into his gig and flew off
as fast as hoof could rattle.  He lived rather nearer to the Squire's
than she did, and was convinced that he could get there well before her.

And so he would but for that whimsical element of chance, which will
for ever muddle up the affairs of this world and dumbfound the
prophets.  Whether it came from the want of his lights, or from his
mind being full of the thoughts of his rival, he allowed too little by
half a foot in taking the sharp turn upon the Basingstoke road.  The
empty trap and the frightened horse clattered away into the darkness,
while the Squire's groom crawled out of the ditch into which he had
been shot.  He struck a match, looked down at his groaning companion,
and then, after the fashion of rough, strong men when they see what
they have not seen before, he was very sick.

The doctor raised himself a little on his elbow in the glint of the
match.  He caught a glimpse of something white and sharp bristling
through his trouser leg half way down the shin.

"Compound!" he groaned.  "A three months' job," and fainted.

When he came to himself the groom was gone, for he had scudded off to
the Squire's house for help, but a small page was holding a gig-lamp in
front of his injured leg, and a woman, with an open case of polished
instruments gleaming in the yellow light, was deftly slitting up his
trouser with a crooked pair of scissors.

"It's all right, doctor," said she soothingly.  "I am so sorry about
it.  You can have Dr. Horton to-morrow, but I am sure you will allow me
to help you to-night.  I could hardly believe my eyes when I saw you by
the roadside."

"The groom has gone for help," groaned the sufferer.

"When it comes we can move you into the gig.  A little more light,
John!  So!  Ah, dear, dear, we shall have laceration unless we reduce
this before we move you.  Allow me to give you a whiff of chloroform,
and I have no doubt that I can secure it sufficiently to----"

Dr. Ripley never heard the end of that sentence.  He tried to raise a
hand and to murmur something in protest, but a sweet smell was in his
nostrils, and a sense of rich peace and lethargy stole over his jangled
nerves.  Down he sank, through clear, cool water, ever down and down
into the green shadows beneath, gently, without effort, while the
pleasant chiming of a great belfry rose and fell in his ears.  Then he
rose again, up and up, and ever up, with a terrible tightness about his
temples, until at last he shot out of those green shadows and was in
the light once more.  Two bright, shining, golden spots gleamed before
his dazed eyes.  He blinked and blinked before he could give a name to
them.  They were only the two brass balls at the end posts of his bed,
and he was lying in his own little room, with a head like a cannon
ball, and a leg like an iron bar.  Turning his eyes, he saw the calm
face of Dr. Verrinder Smith looking down at him.

"Ah, at last!" said she.  "I kept you under all the way home, for I
knew how painful the jolting would be.  It is in good position now with
a strong side splint.  I have ordered a morphia draught for you.  Shall
I tell your groom to ride for Dr. Horton in the morning?"

"I should prefer that you should continue the case," said Dr. Ripley
feebly, and then, with a half hysterical laugh,--"You have all the rest
of the parish as patients, you know, so you may as well make the thing
complete by having me also."

It was not a very gracious speech, but it was a look of pity and not of
anger which shone in her eyes as she turned away from his bedside.

Dr. Ripley had a brother, William, who was assistant surgeon at a
London hospital, and who was down in Hampshire within a few hours of
his hearing of the accident.  He raised his brows when he heard the
details.

"What! You are pestered with one of those!" he cried.

"I don't know what I should have done without her."

"I've no doubt she's an excellent nurse."

"She knows her work as well as you or I."

"Speak for yourself, James," said the London man with a sniff.  "But
apart from that, you know that the principle of the thing is all wrong."

"You think there is nothing to be said on the other side?"

"Good heavens! do you?"

"Well, I don't know.  It struck me during the night that we may have
been a little narrow in our views."

"Nonsense, James.  It's all very fine for women to win prizes in the
lecture room, but you know as well as I do that they are no use in an
emergency.  Now I warrant that this woman was all nerves when she was
setting your leg.  That reminds me that I had better just take a look
at it and see that it is all right."

"I would rather that you did not undo it," said the patient.  "I have
her assurance that it is all right."

Brother William was deeply shocked.

"Of course, if a woman's assurance is of more value than the opinion of
the assistant surgeon of a London hospital, there is nothing more to be
said," he remarked.

"I should prefer that you did not touch it," said the patient firmly,
and Dr. William went back to London that evening in a huff.

The lady, who had heard of his coming, was much surprised on learning
his departure.

"We had a difference upon a point of professional etiquette," said Dr.
James, and it was all the explanation he would vouchsafe.

For two long months Dr. Ripley was brought in contact with his rival
every day, and he learned many things which he had not known before.
She was a charming companion, as well as a most assiduous doctor.  Her
short presence during the long, weary day was like a flower in a sand
waste.  What interested him was precisely what interested her, and she
could meet him at every point upon equal terms.  And yet under all her
learning and her firmness ran a sweet, womanly nature, peeping out in
her talk, shining in her greenish eyes, showing itself in a thousand
subtle ways which the dullest of men could read.  And he, though a bit
of a prig and a pedant, was by no means dull, and had honesty enough to
confess when he was in the wrong.

"I don't know how to apologise to you," he said in his shame-faced
fashion one day, when he had progressed so far as to be able to sit in
an arm-chair with his leg upon another one; "I feel that I have been
quite in the wrong."

"Why, then?"

"Over this woman question.  I used to think that a woman must
inevitably lose something of her charm if she took up such studies."

"Oh, you don't think they are necessarily unsexed, then?" she cried,
with a mischievous smile.

"Please don't recall my idiotic expression."

"I feel so pleased that I should have helped in changing your views.  I
think that it is the most sincere compliment that I have ever had paid
me."

"At any rate, it is the truth," said he, and was happy all night at the
remembrance of the flush of pleasure which made her pale face look
quite comely for the instant.

For, indeed, he was already far past the stage when he would
acknowledge her as the equal of any other woman.  Already he could not
disguise from himself that she had become the one woman.  Her dainty
skill, her gentle touch, her sweet presence, the community of their
tastes, had all united to hopelessly upset his previous opinions.  It
was a dark day for him now when his convalescence allowed her to miss a
visit, and darker still that other one which he saw approaching when
all occasion for her visits would be at an end.  It came round at last,
however, and he felt that his whole life's fortune would hang upon the
issue of that final interview.  He was a direct man by nature, so he
laid his hand upon hers as it felt for his pulse, and he asked her if
she would be his wife.

"What, and unite the practices?" said she.

He started in pain and anger.

"Surely you do not attribute any such base motive to me!" he cried.  "I
love you as unselfishly as ever a woman was loved."

"No, I was wrong.  It was a foolish speech," said she, moving her chair
a little back, and tapping her stethoscope upon her knee.  "Forget that
I ever said it.  I am so sorry to cause you any disappointment, and I
appreciate most highly the honour which you do me, but what you ask is
quite impossible."

With another woman he might have urged the point, but his instincts
told him that it was quite useless with this one.  Her tone of voice
was conclusive.  He said nothing, but leaned back in his chair a
stricken man.

"I am so sorry," she said again.  "If I had known what was passing in
your mind I should have told you earlier that I intended to devote my
life entirely to science.  There are many women with a capacity for
marriage, but few with a taste for biology.  I will remain true to my
own line, then.  I came down here while waiting for an opening in the
Paris Physiological Laboratory.  I have just heard that there is a
vacancy for me there, and so you will be troubled no more by my
intrusion upon your practice.  I have done you an injustice just as you
did me one.  I thought you narrow and pedantic, with no good quality.
I have learned during your illness to appreciate you better, and the
recollection of our friendship will always be a very pleasant one to
me."

And so it came about that in a very few weeks there was only one doctor
in Hoyland.  But folks noticed that the one had aged many years in a
few months, that a weary sadness lurked always in the depths of his
blue eyes, and that he was less concerned than ever with the eligible
young ladies whom chance, or their careful country mammas, placed in
his way.




THE SURGEON TALKS.

"Men die of the diseases which they have studied most," remarked the
surgeon, snipping off the end of a cigar with all his professional
neatness and finish.  "It's as if the morbid condition was an evil
creature which, when it found itself closely hunted, flew at the throat
of its pursuer.  If you worry the microbes too much they may worry you.
I've seen cases of it, and not necessarily in microbic diseases either.
There was, of course, the well-known instance of Liston and the
aneurism; and a dozen others that I could mention.  You couldn't have a
clearer case than that of poor old Walker of St.  Christopher's.  Not
heard of it?  Well, of course, it was a little before your time, but I
wonder that it should have been forgotten.  You youngsters are so busy
in keeping up to the day that you lose a good deal that is interesting
of yesterday.

"Walker was one of the best men in Europe on nervous disease.  You must
have read his little book on sclerosis of the posterior columns.  It's
as interesting as a novel, and epoch-making in its way.  He worked like
a horse, did Walker--huge consulting practice--hours a day in the
clinical wards--constant original investigations.  And then he enjoyed
himself also.  'De mortuis,' of course, but still it's an open secret
among all who knew him.  If he died at forty-five, he crammed eighty
years into it.  The marvel was that he could have held on so long at
the pace at which he was going.  But he took it beautifully when it
came.

"I was his clinical assistant at the time.  Walker was lecturing on
locomotor ataxia to a wardful of youngsters.  He was explaining that
one of the early signs of the complaint was that the patient could not
put his heels together with his eyes shut without staggering.  As he
spoke, he suited the action to the word.  I don't suppose the boys
noticed anything.  I did, and so did he, though he finished his lecture
without a sign.

"When it was over he came into my room and lit a cigarette.

"'Just run over my reflexes, Smith,' said he.

"There was hardly a trace of them left.  I tapped away at his
knee-tendon and might as well have tried to get a jerk out of that
sofa-cushion.  He stood with his eyes shut again, and he swayed like a
bush in the wind.

"'So,' said he, 'it was not intercostal neuralgia after all.'

"Then I knew that he had had the lightning pains, and that the case was
complete.  There was nothing to say, so I sat looking at him while he
puffed and puffed at his cigarette.  Here he was, a man in the prime of
life, one of the handsomest men in London, with money, fame, social
success, everything at his feet, and now, without a moment's warning,
he was told that inevitable death lay before him, a death accompanied
by more refined and lingering tortures than if he were bound upon a Red
Indian stake.  He sat in the middle of the blue cigarette cloud with
his eyes cast down, and the slightest little tightening of his lips.
Then he rose with a motion of his arms, as one who throws off old
thoughts and enters upon a new course.

"'Better put this thing straight at once,' said he.  'I must make some
fresh arrangements.  May I use your paper and envelopes?'

"He settled himself at my desk and he wrote half a dozen letters.  It
is not a breach of confidence to say that they were not addressed to
his professional brothers.  Walker was a single man, which means that
he was not restricted to a single woman.  When he had finished, he
walked out of that little room of mine, leaving every hope and ambition
of his life behind him.  And he might have had another year of
ignorance and peace if it had not been for the chance illustration in
his lecture.

"It took five years to kill him, and he stood it well.  If he had ever
been a little irregular he atoned for it in that long martyrdom.  He
kept an admirable record of his own symptoms, and worked out the eye
changes more fully than has ever been done.  When the ptosis got very
bad he would hold his eyelid up with one hand while he wrote.  Then,
when he could not co-ordinate his muscles to write, he dictated to his
nurse.  So died, in the odour of science, James Walker, aet. 45.

"Poor old Walker was very fond of experimental surgery, and he broke
ground in several directions.  Between ourselves, there may have been
some more ground-breaking afterwards, but he did his best for his
cases.  You know M'Namara, don't you?  He always wears his hair long.
He lets it be understood that it comes from his artistic strain, but it
is really to conceal the loss of one of his ears.  Walker cut the other
one off, but you must not tell Mac I said so.

"It was like this.  Walker had a fad about the portio dura--the motor
to the face, you know--and he thought paralysis of it came from a
disturbance of the blood supply.  Something else which counterbalanced
that disturbance might, he thought, set it right again.  We had a very
obstinate case of Bell's paralysis in the wards, and had tried it with
every conceivable thing, blistering, tonics, nerve-stretching,
galvanism, needles, but all without result.  Walker got it into his
head that removal of the ear would increase the blood supply to the
part, and he very soon gained the consent of the patient to the
operation.

"Well, we did it at night.  Walker, of course, felt that it was
something of an experiment, and did not wish too much talk about it
unless it proved successful.  There were half-a-dozen of us there,
M'Namara and I among the rest.  The room was a small one, and in the
centre was in the narrow table, with a macintosh over the pillow, and a
blanket which extended almost to the floor on either side.  Two
candles, on a side-table near the pillow, supplied all the light.  In
came the patient, with one side of his face as smooth as a baby's, and
the other all in a quiver with fright.  He lay down, and the chloroform
towel was placed over his face, while Walker threaded his needles in
the candle light.  The chloroformist stood at the head of the table,
and M'Namara was stationed at the side to control the patient.  The
rest of us stood by to assist.

"Well, the man was about half over when he fell into one of those
convulsive flurries which come with the semi-unconscious stage. He
kicked and plunged and struck out with both hands.  Over with a crash
went the little table which held the candles, and in an instant we were
left in total darkness.  You can think what a rush and a scurry there
was, one to pick up the table, one to find the matches, and some to
restrain the patient who was still dashing himself about.  He was held
down by two dressers, the chloroform was pushed, and by the time the
candles were relit, his incoherent, half-smothered shoutings had
changed to a stertorous snore.   His head was turned on the pillow and
the towel was still kept over his face while the operation was carried
through.  Then the towel was withdrawn, and you can conceive our
amazement when we looked upon the face of M'Namara.

"How did it happen?  Why, simply enough.  As the candles went over, the
chloroformist had stopped for an instant and had tried to catch them.
The patient, just as the light went out, had rolled off and under the
table.  Poor M'Namara, clinging frantically to him, had been dragged
across it, and the chloroformist, feeling him there, had naturally
claped the towel across his mouth and nose.  The others had secured
him, and the more he roared and kicked the more they drenched him with
chloroform.  Walker was very nice about it, and made the most handsome
apologies.  He offered to do a plastic on the spot, and make as good an
ear as he could, but M'Namara had had enough of it.  As to the patient,
we found him sleeping placidly under the table, with the ends of the
blanket screening him on both sides.  Walker sent M'Namara round his
ear next day in a jar of methylated spirit, but Mac's wife was very
angry about it, and it led to a good deal of ill-feeling.

"Some people say that the more one has to do with human nature, and the
closer one is brought in contact with it, the less one thinks of it.  I
don't believe that those who know most would uphold that view.  My own
experience is dead against it.  I was brought up in the
miserable-mortal-clay school of theology, and yet here I am, after
thirty years of intimate acquaintance with humanity, filled with
respect for it.  The evil lies commonly upon the surface.  The deeper
strata are good.  A hundred times I have seen folk condemned to death
as suddenly as poor Walker was.  Sometimes it was to blindness or to
mutilations which are worse than death.  Men and women, they almost all
took it beautifully, and some with such lovely unselfishness, and with
such complete absorption in the thought of how their fate would affect
others, that the man about town, or the frivolously-dressed woman has
seemed to change into an angel before my eyes.  I have seen death-beds,
too, of all ages and of all creeds and want of creeds.  I never saw any
of them shrink, save only one poor, imaginative young fellow, who had
spent his blameless life in the strictest of sects.  Of course, an
exhausted frame is incapable of fear, as anyone can vouch who is told,
in the midst of his sea-sickness, that the ship is going to the bottom.
That is why I rate courage in the face of mutilation to be higher than
courage when a wasting illness is fining away into death.

"Now, I'll take a case which I had in my own practice last Wednesday.
A lady came in to consult me--the wife of a well-known sporting
baronet.  The husband had come with her, but remained, at her request,
in the waiting-room.  I need not go into details, but it proved to be a
peculiarly malignant case of cancer.  'I knew it,' said she.  'How long
have I to live?'  'I fear that it may exhaust your strength in a few
months,' I answered.  'Poor old Jack!' said she.  'I'll tell him that
it is not dangerous.'  'Why should you deceive him?' I asked.  'Well,
he's very uneasy about it, and he is quaking now in the waiting-room.
He has two old friends to dinner to-night, and I haven't the heart to
spoil his evening.  To-morrow will be time enough for him to learn the
truth.'  Out she walked, the brave little woman, and a moment later her
husband, with his big, red face shining with joy came plunging into my
room to shake me by the hand.  No, I respected her wish and I did not
undeceive him.  I dare bet that evening was one of the brightest, and
the next morning the darkest, of his life.

"It's wonderful how bravely and cheerily a woman can face a crushing
blow.  It is different with men.  A man can stand it without
complaining, but it knocks him dazed and silly all the same.  But the
woman does not lose her wits any more than she does her courage.  Now,
I had a case only a few weeks ago which would show you what I mean.  A
gentleman consulted me about his wife, a very beautiful woman.  She had
a small tubercular nodule upon her upper arm, according to him.  He was
sure that it was of no importance, but he wanted to know whether
Devonshire or the Riviera would be the better for her. I examined her
and found a frightful sarcoma of the bone, hardly showing upon the
surface, but involving the shoulder-blade and clavicle as well as the
humerus.  A more malignant case I have never seen.  I sent her out of
the room and I told him the truth.  What did he do?  Why, he walked
slowly round that room with his hands behind his back, looking with the
greatest interest at the pictures.  I can see him now, putting up his
gold pince-nez and staring at them with perfectly vacant eyes, which
told me that he saw neither them nor the wall behind them.  'Amputation
of the arm?' he asked at last.  'And of the collar-bone and
shoulder-blade,' said I.  'Quite so.  The collar-bone and
shoulder-blade,' he repeated, still staring about him with those
lifeless eyes.  It settled him.  I don't believe he'll ever be the same
man again.  But the woman took it as bravely and brightly as could be,
and she has done very well since.   The mischief was so great that the
arm snapped as we drew it from the night-dress.  No, I don't think that
there will be any return, and I have every hope of her recovery.

"The first patient is a thing which one remembers all one's life.  Mine
was commonplace, and the details are of no interest.  I had a curious
visitor, however, during the first few months after my plate went up.
It was an elderly woman, richly dressed, with a wickerwork picnic
basket in her hand.  This she opened with the tears streaming down her
face, and out there waddled the fattest, ugliest, and mangiest little
pug dog that I have ever seen.  'I wish you to put him painlessly out
of the world, doctor,' she cried.  'Quick, quick, or my resolution may
give way.'  She flung herself down, with hysterical sobs, upon the
sofa.  The less experienced a doctor is, the higher are his notions of
professional dignity, as I need not remind you, my young friend, so I
was about to refuse the commission with indignation, when I bethought
me that, quite apart from medicine, we were gentleman and lady, and
that she had asked me to do something for her which was evidently of
the greatest possible importance in her eyes.  I led off the poor
little doggie, therefore, and with the help of a saucerful of milk and
a few drops of prussic acid his exit was as speedy and painless as
could be desired.  'Is it over?' she cried as I entered.  It was really
tragic to see how all the love which should have gone to husband and
children had, in default of them, been centred upon this uncouth little
animal.  She left, quite broken down, in her carriage, and it was only
after her departure that I saw an envelope sealed with a large red
seal, and lying upon the blotting pad of my desk.  Outside, in pencil,
was written:  'I have no doubt that you would willingly have done this
without a fee, but I insist upon your acceptance of the enclosed.'  I
opened it with some vague notions of an eccentric millionaire and a
fifty-pound note, but all I found was a postal order for four and
sixpence.  The whole incident struck me as so whimsical that I laughed
until I was tired.  You'll find there's so much tragedy in a doctor's
life, my boy, that he would not be able to stand it if it were not for
the strain of comedy which comes every now and then to leaven it.

"And a doctor has very much to be thankful for also.  Don't you ever
forget it.  It is such a pleasure to do a little good that a man should
pay for the privilege instead of being paid for it.  Still, of course,
he has his home to keep up and his wife and children to support.  But
his patients are his friends--or they should be so.  He goes from house
to house, and his step and his voice are loved and welcomed in each.
What could a man ask for more than that?  And besides, he is forced to
be a good man.  It is impossible for him to be anything else.  How can
a man spend his whole life in seeing suffering bravely borne and yet
remain a hard or a vicious man?  It is a noble, generous, kindly
profession, and you youngsters have got to see that it remains so."


The Sign of the Four

by Arthur Conan Doyle



Contents


   Chapter I. The Science of Deduction
   Chapter II. The Statement of the Case
   Chapter III. In Quest of a Solution
   Chapter IV. The Story of the Bald-Headed Man
   Chapter V. The Tragedy of Pondicherry Lodge
   Chapter VI. Sherlock Holmes Gives a Demonstration
   Chapter VII. The Episode of the Barrel
   Chapter VIII. The Baker Street Irregulars
   Chapter IX. A Break in the Chain
   Chapter X. The End of the Islander
   Chapter XI. The Great Agra Treasure
   Chapter XII. The Strange Story of Jonathan Small




Chapter I
The Science of Deduction


Sherlock Holmes took his bottle from the corner of the mantel-piece and
his hypodermic syringe from its neat morocco case. With his long,
white, nervous fingers he adjusted the delicate needle, and rolled back
his left shirt-cuff. For some little time his eyes rested thoughtfully
upon the sinewy forearm and wrist all dotted and scarred with
innumerable puncture-marks. Finally he thrust the sharp point home,
pressed down the tiny piston, and sank back into the velvet-lined
arm-chair with a long sigh of satisfaction.

Three times a day for many months I had witnessed this performance, but
custom had not reconciled my mind to it. On the contrary, from day to
day I had become more irritable at the sight, and my conscience swelled
nightly within me at the thought that I had lacked the courage to
protest. Again and again I had registered a vow that I should deliver
my soul upon the subject, but there was that in the cool, nonchalant
air of my companion which made him the last man with whom one would
care to take anything approaching to a liberty. His great powers, his
masterly manner, and the experience which I had had of his many
extraordinary qualities, all made me diffident and backward in crossing
him.

Yet upon that afternoon, whether it was the Beaune which I had taken
with my lunch, or the additional exasperation produced by the extreme
deliberation of his manner, I suddenly felt that I could hold out no
longer.

“Which is it to-day?” I asked,—“morphine or cocaine?”

He raised his eyes languidly from the old black-letter volume which he
had opened. “It is cocaine,” he said,—“a seven-per-cent. solution.
Would you care to try it?”

“No, indeed,” I answered, brusquely. “My constitution has not got over
the Afghan campaign yet. I cannot afford to throw any extra strain upon
it.”

He smiled at my vehemence. “Perhaps you are right, Watson,” he said. “I
suppose that its influence is physically a bad one. I find it, however,
so transcendently stimulating and clarifying to the mind that its
secondary action is a matter of small moment.”

“But consider!” I said, earnestly. “Count the cost! Your brain may, as
you say, be roused and excited, but it is a pathological and morbid
process, which involves increased tissue-change and may at last leave a
permanent weakness. You know, too, what a black reaction comes upon
you. Surely the game is hardly worth the candle. Why should you, for a
mere passing pleasure, risk the loss of those great powers with which
you have been endowed? Remember that I speak not only as one comrade to
another, but as a medical man to one for whose constitution he is to
some extent answerable.”

He did not seem offended. On the contrary, he put his finger-tips
together and leaned his elbows on the arms of his chair, like one who
has a relish for conversation.

“My mind,” he said, “rebels at stagnation. Give me problems, give me
work, give me the most abstruse cryptogram or the most intricate
analysis, and I am in my own proper atmosphere. I can dispense then
with artificial stimulants. But I abhor the dull routine of existence.
I crave for mental exaltation. That is why I have chosen my own
particular profession,—or rather created it, for I am the only one in
the world.”

“The only unofficial detective?” I said, raising my eyebrows.

“The only unofficial consulting detective,” he answered. “I am the last
and highest court of appeal in detection. When Gregson or Lestrade or
Athelney Jones are out of their depths—which, by the way, is their
normal state—the matter is laid before me. I examine the data, as an
expert, and pronounce a specialist’s opinion. I claim no credit in such
cases. My name figures in no newspaper. The work itself, the pleasure
of finding a field for my peculiar powers, is my highest reward. But
you have yourself had some experience of my methods of work in the
Jefferson Hope case.”

“Yes, indeed,” said I, cordially. “I was never so struck by anything in
my life. I even embodied it in a small brochure with the somewhat
fantastic title of ‘A Study in Scarlet.’”

He shook his head sadly. “I glanced over it,” said he. “Honestly, I
cannot congratulate you upon it. Detection is, or ought to be, an exact
science, and should be treated in the same cold and unemotional manner.
You have attempted to tinge it with romanticism, which produces much
the same effect as if you worked a love-story or an elopement into the
fifth proposition of Euclid.”

“But the romance was there,” I remonstrated. “I could not tamper with
the facts.”

“Some facts should be suppressed, or at least a just sense of
proportion should be observed in treating them. The only point in the
case which deserved mention was the curious analytical reasoning from
effects to causes by which I succeeded in unraveling it.”

I was annoyed at this criticism of a work which had been specially
designed to please him. I confess, too, that I was irritated by the
egotism which seemed to demand that every line of my pamphlet should be
devoted to his own special doings. More than once during the years that
I had lived with him in Baker Street I had observed that a small vanity
underlay my companion’s quiet and didactic manner. I made no remark,
however, but sat nursing my wounded leg. I had a Jezail bullet through
it some time before, and, though it did not prevent me from walking, it
ached wearily at every change of the weather.

“My practice has extended recently to the Continent,” said Holmes,
after a while, filling up his old brier-root pipe. “I was consulted
last week by François Le Villard, who, as you probably know, has come
rather to the front lately in the French detective service. He has all
the Celtic power of quick intuition, but he is deficient in the wide
range of exact knowledge which is essential to the higher developments
of his art. The case was concerned with a will, and possessed some
features of interest. I was able to refer him to two parallel cases,
the one at Riga in 1857, and the other at St. Louis in 1871, which have
suggested to him the true solution. Here is the letter which I had this
morning acknowledging my assistance.” He tossed over, as he spoke, a
crumpled sheet of foreign notepaper. I glanced my eyes down it,
catching a profusion of notes of admiration, with stray “magnifiques,”
“coup-de-maîtres,” and “tours-de-force,” all testifying to the ardent
admiration of the Frenchman.

“He speaks as a pupil to his master,” said I.

“Oh, he rates my assistance too highly,” said Sherlock Holmes, lightly.
“He has considerable gifts himself. He possesses two out of the three
qualities necessary for the ideal detective. He has the power of
observation and that of deduction. He is only wanting in knowledge; and
that may come in time. He is now translating my small works into
French.”

“Your works?”

“Oh, didn’t you know?” he cried, laughing. “Yes, I have been guilty of
several monographs. They are all upon technical subjects. Here, for
example, is one ‘Upon the Distinction between the Ashes of the Various
Tobaccoes.’ In it I enumerate a hundred and forty forms of cigar-,
cigarette-, and pipe-tobacco, with coloured plates illustrating the
difference in the ash. It is a point which is continually turning up in
criminal trials, and which is sometimes of supreme importance as a
clue. If you can say definitely, for example, that some murder has been
done by a man who was smoking an Indian lunkah, it obviously narrows
your field of search. To the trained eye there is as much difference
between the black ash of a Trichinopoly and the white fluff of
bird’s-eye as there is between a cabbage and a potato.”

“You have an extraordinary genius for minutiæ,” I remarked.

“I appreciate their importance. Here is my monograph upon the tracing
of footsteps, with some remarks upon the uses of plaster of Paris as a
preserver of impresses. Here, too, is a curious little work upon the
influence of a trade upon the form of the hand, with lithotypes of the
hands of slaters, sailors, corkcutters, compositors, weavers, and
diamond-polishers. That is a matter of great practical interest to the
scientific detective,—especially in cases of unclaimed bodies, or in
discovering the antecedents of criminals. But I weary you with my
hobby.”

“Not at all,” I answered, earnestly. “It is of the greatest interest to
me, especially since I have had the opportunity of observing your
practical application of it. But you spoke just now of observation and
deduction. Surely the one to some extent implies the other.”

“Why, hardly,” he answered, leaning back luxuriously in his arm-chair,
and sending up thick blue wreaths from his pipe. “For example,
observation shows me that you have been to the Wigmore Street
Post-Office this morning, but deduction lets me know that when there
you dispatched a telegram.”

“Right!” said I. “Right on both points! But I confess that I don’t see
how you arrived at it. It was a sudden impulse upon my part, and I have
mentioned it to no one.”

“It is simplicity itself,” he remarked, chuckling at my surprise,—“so
absurdly simple that an explanation is superfluous; and yet it may
serve to define the limits of observation and of deduction. Observation
tells me that you have a little reddish mould adhering to your instep.
Just opposite the Wigmore Street Office they have taken up the pavement
and thrown up some earth which lies in such a way that it is difficult
to avoid treading in it in entering. The earth is of this peculiar
reddish tint which is found, as far as I know, nowhere else in the
neighbourhood. So much is observation. The rest is deduction.”

“How, then, did you deduce the telegram?”

“Why, of course I knew that you had not written a letter, since I sat
opposite to you all morning. I see also in your open desk there that
you have a sheet of stamps and a thick bundle of post-cards. What could
you go into the post-office for, then, but to send a wire? Eliminate
all other factors, and the one which remains must be the truth.”

“In this case it certainly is so,” I replied, after a little thought.
“The thing, however, is, as you say, of the simplest. Would you think
me impertinent if I were to put your theories to a more severe test?”

“On the contrary,” he answered, “it would prevent me from taking a
second dose of cocaine. I should be delighted to look into any problem
which you might submit to me.”

“I have heard you say that it is difficult for a man to have any object
in daily use without leaving the impress of his individuality upon it
in such a way that a trained observer might read it. Now, I have here a
watch which has recently come into my possession. Would you have the
kindness to let me have an opinion upon the character or habits of the
late owner?”

I handed him over the watch with some slight feeling of amusement in my
heart, for the test was, as I thought, an impossible one, and I
intended it as a lesson against the somewhat dogmatic tone which he
occasionally assumed. He balanced the watch in his hand, gazed hard at
the dial, opened the back, and examined the works, first with his naked
eyes and then with a powerful convex lens. I could hardly keep from
smiling at his crestfallen face when he finally snapped the case to and
handed it back.

“There are hardly any data,” he remarked. “The watch has been recently
cleaned, which robs me of my most suggestive facts.”

“You are right,” I answered. “It was cleaned before being sent to me.”
In my heart I accused my companion of putting forward a most lame and
impotent excuse to cover his failure. What data could he expect from an
uncleaned watch?

“Though unsatisfactory, my research has not been entirely barren,” he
observed, staring up at the ceiling with dreamy, lack-lustre eyes.
“Subject to your correction, I should judge that the watch belonged to
your elder brother, who inherited it from your father.”

“That you gather, no doubt, from the H. W. upon the back?”

“Quite so. The W. suggests your own name. The date of the watch is
nearly fifty years back, and the initials are as old as the watch: so
it was made for the last generation. Jewelry usually descends to the
eldest son, and he is most likely to have the same name as the father.
Your father has, if I remember right, been dead many years. It has,
therefore, been in the hands of your eldest brother.”

“Right, so far,” said I. “Anything else?”

“He was a man of untidy habits,—very untidy and careless. He was left
with good prospects, but he threw away his chances, lived for some time
in poverty with occasional short intervals of prosperity, and finally,
taking to drink, he died. That is all I can gather.”

I sprang from my chair and limped impatiently about the room with
considerable bitterness in my heart.

“This is unworthy of you, Holmes,” I said. “I could not have believed
that you would have descended to this. You have made inquires into the
history of my unhappy brother, and you now pretend to deduce this
knowledge in some fanciful way. You cannot expect me to believe that
you have read all this from his old watch! It is unkind, and, to speak
plainly, has a touch of charlatanism in it.”

“My dear doctor,” said he, kindly, “pray accept my apologies. Viewing
the matter as an abstract problem, I had forgotten how personal and
painful a thing it might be to you. I assure you, however, that I never
even knew that you had a brother until you handed me the watch.”

“Then how in the name of all that is wonderful did you get these facts?
They are absolutely correct in every particular.”

“Ah, that is good luck. I could only say what was the balance of
probability. I did not at all expect to be so accurate.”

“But it was not mere guess-work?”

“No, no: I never guess. It is a shocking habit,—destructive to the
logical faculty. What seems strange to you is only so because you do
not follow my train of thought or observe the small facts upon which
large inferences may depend. For example, I began by stating that your
brother was careless. When you observe the lower part of that
watch-case you notice that it is not only dinted in two places, but it
is cut and marked all over from the habit of keeping other hard
objects, such as coins or keys, in the same pocket. Surely it is no
great feat to assume that a man who treats a fifty-guinea watch so
cavalierly must be a careless man. Neither is it a very far-fetched
inference that a man who inherits one article of such value is pretty
well provided for in other respects.”

I nodded, to show that I followed his reasoning.

“It is very customary for pawnbrokers in England, when they take a
watch, to scratch the number of the ticket with a pin-point upon the
inside of the case. It is more handy than a label, as there is no risk
of the number being lost or transposed. There are no less than four
such numbers visible to my lens on the inside of this case.
Inference,—that your brother was often at low water. Secondary
inference,—that he had occasional bursts of prosperity, or he could not
have redeemed the pledge. Finally, I ask you to look at the inner
plate, which contains the key-hole. Look at the thousands of scratches
all round the hole,—marks where the key has slipped. What sober man’s
key could have scored those grooves? But you will never see a
drunkard’s watch without them. He winds it at night, and he leaves
these traces of his unsteady hand. Where is the mystery in all this?”

“It is as clear as daylight,” I answered. “I regret the injustice which
I did you. I should have had more faith in your marvellous faculty. May
I ask whether you have any professional inquiry on foot at present?”

“None. Hence the cocaine. I cannot live without brain-work. What else
is there to live for? Stand at the window here. Was ever such a dreary,
dismal, unprofitable world? See how the yellow fog swirls down the
street and drifts across the dun-coloured houses. What could be more
hopelessly prosaic and material? What is the use of having powers,
doctor, when one has no field upon which to exert them? Crime is
commonplace, existence is commonplace, and no qualities save those
which are commonplace have any function upon earth.”

I had opened my mouth to reply to this tirade, when with a crisp knock
our landlady entered, bearing a card upon the brass salver.

“A young lady for you, sir,” she said, addressing my companion.

“Miss Mary Morstan,” he read. “Hum! I have no recollection of the name.
Ask the young lady to step up, Mrs. Hudson. Don’t go, doctor. I should
prefer that you remain.”




Chapter II
The Statement of the Case


Miss Morstan entered the room with a firm step and an outward composure
of manner. She was a blonde young lady, small, dainty, well gloved, and
dressed in the most perfect taste. There was, however, a plainness and
simplicity about her costume which bore with it a suggestion of limited
means. The dress was a sombre greyish beige, untrimmed and unbraided,
and she wore a small turban of the same dull hue, relieved only by a
suspicion of white feather in the side. Her face had neither regularity
of feature nor beauty of complexion, but her expression was sweet and
amiable, and her large blue eyes were singularly spiritual and
sympathetic. In an experience of women which extends over many nations
and three separate continents, I have never looked upon a face which
gave a clearer promise of a refined and sensitive nature. I could not
but observe that as she took the seat which Sherlock Holmes placed for
her, her lip trembled, her hand quivered, and she showed every sign of
intense inward agitation.

“I have come to you, Mr. Holmes,” she said, “because you once enabled
my employer, Mrs. Cecil Forrester, to unravel a little domestic
complication. She was much impressed by your kindness and skill.”

“Mrs. Cecil Forrester,” he repeated thoughtfully. “I believe that I was
of some slight service to her. The case, however, as I remember it, was
a very simple one.”

“She did not think so. But at least you cannot say the same of mine. I
can hardly imagine anything more strange, more utterly inexplicable,
than the situation in which I find myself.”

Holmes rubbed his hands, and his eyes glistened. He leaned forward in
his chair with an expression of extraordinary concentration upon his
clear-cut, hawklike features. “State your case,” said he, in brisk,
business tones.

I felt that my position was an embarrassing one. “You will, I am sure,
excuse me,” I said, rising from my chair.

To my surprise, the young lady held up her gloved hand to detain me.
“If your friend,” she said, “would be good enough to stop, he might be
of inestimable service to me.”

I relapsed into my chair.

“Briefly,” she continued, “the facts are these. My father was an
officer in an Indian regiment who sent me home when I was quite a
child. My mother was dead, and I had no relative in England. I was
placed, however, in a comfortable boarding establishment at Edinburgh,
and there I remained until I was seventeen years of age. In the year
1878 my father, who was senior captain of his regiment, obtained twelve
months’ leave and came home. He telegraphed to me from London that he
had arrived all safe, and directed me to come down at once, giving the
Langham Hotel as his address. His message, as I remember, was full of
kindness and love. On reaching London I drove to the Langham, and was
informed that Captain Morstan was staying there, but that he had gone
out the night before and had not yet returned. I waited all day without
news of him. That night, on the advice of the manager of the hotel, I
communicated with the police, and next morning we advertised in all the
papers. Our inquiries led to no result; and from that day to this no
word has ever been heard of my unfortunate father. He came home with
his heart full of hope, to find some peace, some comfort, and instead—”
She put her hand to her throat, and a choking sob cut short the
sentence.

“The date?” asked Holmes, opening his note-book.

“He disappeared upon the 3rd of December, 1878,—nearly ten years ago.”

“His luggage?”

“Remained at the hotel. There was nothing in it to suggest a clue,—some
clothes, some books, and a considerable number of curiosities from the
Andaman Islands. He had been one of the officers in charge of the
convict-guard there.”

“Had he any friends in town?”

“Only one that we know of,—Major Sholto, of his own regiment, the 34th
Bombay Infantry. The major had retired some little time before, and
lived at Upper Norwood. We communicated with him, of course, but he did
not even know that his brother officer was in England.”

“A singular case,” remarked Holmes.

“I have not yet described to you the most singular part. About six
years ago—to be exact, upon the 4th of May, 1882—an advertisement
appeared in the _Times_ asking for the address of Miss Mary Morstan and
stating that it would be to her advantage to come forward. There was no
name or address appended. I had at that time just entered the family of
Mrs. Cecil Forrester in the capacity of governess. By her advice I
published my address in the advertisement column. The same day there
arrived through the post a small card-board box addressed to me, which
I found to contain a very large and lustrous pearl. No word of writing
was enclosed. Since then every year upon the same date there has always
appeared a similar box, containing a similar pearl, without any clue as
to the sender. They have been pronounced by an expert to be of a rare
variety and of considerable value. You can see for yourselves that they
are very handsome.” She opened a flat box as she spoke, and showed me
six of the finest pearls that I had ever seen.

“Your statement is most interesting,” said Sherlock Holmes. “Has
anything else occurred to you?”

“Yes, and no later than to-day. That is why I have come to you. This
morning I received this letter, which you will perhaps read for
yourself.”

“Thank you,” said Holmes. “The envelope too, please. Postmark, London,
S.W. Date, July 7. Hum! Man’s thumb-mark on corner,—probably postman.
Best quality paper. Envelopes at sixpence a packet. Particular man in
his stationery. No address. ‘Be at the third pillar from the left
outside the Lyceum Theatre to-night at seven o’clock. If you are
distrustful, bring two friends. You are a wronged woman, and shall have
justice. Do not bring police. If you do, all will be in vain. Your
unknown friend.’ Well, really, this is a very pretty little mystery.
What do you intend to do, Miss Morstan?”

“That is exactly what I want to ask you.”

“Then we shall most certainly go. You and I and—yes, why, Dr. Watson is
the very man. Your correspondent says two friends. He and I have worked
together before.”

“But would he come?” she asked, with something appealing in her voice
and expression.

“I should be proud and happy,” said I, fervently, “if I can be of any
service.”

“You are both very kind,” she answered. “I have led a retired life, and
have no friends whom I could appeal to. If I am here at six it will do,
I suppose?”

“You must not be later,” said Holmes. “There is one other point,
however. Is this handwriting the same as that upon the pearl-box
addresses?”

“I have them here,” she answered, producing half a dozen pieces of
paper.

“You are certainly a model client. You have the correct intuition. Let
us see, now.” He spread out the papers upon the table, and gave little
darting glances from one to the other. “They are disguised hands,
except the letter,” he said, presently, “but there can be no question
as to the authorship. See how the irrepressible Greek _e_ will break
out, and see the twirl of the final _s_. They are undoubtedly by the
same person. I should not like to suggest false hopes, Miss Morstan,
but is there any resemblance between this hand and that of your
father?”

“Nothing could be more unlike.”

“I expected to hear you say so. We shall look out for you, then, at
six. Pray allow me to keep the papers. I may look into the matter
before then. It is only half-past three. _Au revoir_, then.”

“_Au revoir_,” said our visitor, and, with a bright, kindly glance from
one to the other of us, she replaced her pearl-box in her bosom and
hurried away. Standing at the window, I watched her walking briskly
down the street, until the grey turban and white feather were but a
speck in the sombre crowd.

“What a very attractive woman!” I exclaimed, turning to my companion.

He had lit his pipe again, and was leaning back with drooping eyelids.
“Is she?” he said, languidly. “I did not observe.”

“You really are an automaton,—a calculating-machine!” I cried. “There
is something positively inhuman in you at times.”

He smiled gently. “It is of the first importance,” he said, “not to
allow your judgment to be biased by personal qualities. A client is to
me a mere unit,—a factor in a problem. The emotional qualities are
antagonistic to clear reasoning. I assure you that the most winning
woman I ever knew was hanged for poisoning three little children for
their insurance-money, and the most repellant man of my acquaintance is
a philanthropist who has spent nearly a quarter of a million upon the
London poor.”

“In this case, however—”

“I never make exceptions. An exception disproves the rule. Have you
ever had occasion to study character in handwriting? What do you make
of this fellow’s scribble?”

“It is legible and regular,” I answered. “A man of business habits and
some force of character.”

Holmes shook his head. “Look at his long letters,” he said. “They
hardly rise above the common herd. That _d_ might be an _a_, and that
_l_ an _e_. Men of character always differentiate their long letters,
however illegibly they may write. There is vacillation in his _k_’s and
self-esteem in his capitals. I am going out now. I have some few
references to make. Let me recommend this book,—one of the most
remarkable ever penned. It is Winwood Reade’s ‘Martyrdom of Man.’ I
shall be back in an hour.”

I sat in the window with the volume in my hand, but my thoughts were
far from the daring speculations of the writer. My mind ran upon our
late visitor,—her smiles, the deep rich tones of her voice, the strange
mystery which overhung her life. If she were seventeen at the time of
her father’s disappearance she must be seven-and-twenty now,—a sweet
age, when youth has lost its self-consciousness and become a little
sobered by experience. So I sat and mused, until such dangerous
thoughts came into my head that I hurried away to my desk and plunged
furiously into the latest treatise upon pathology. What was I, an army
surgeon with a weak leg and a weaker banking-account, that I should
dare to think of such things? She was a unit, a factor,—nothing more.
If my future were black, it was better surely to face it like a man
than to attempt to brighten it by mere will-o’-the-wisps of the
imagination.




Chapter III
In Quest of a Solution


It was half-past five before Holmes returned. He was bright, eager, and
in excellent spirits,—a mood which in his case alternated with fits of
the blackest depression.

“There is no great mystery in this matter,” he said, taking the cup of
tea which I had poured out for him. “The facts appear to admit of only
one explanation.”

“What! you have solved it already?”

“Well, that would be too much to say. I have discovered a suggestive
fact, that is all. It is, however, _very_ suggestive. The details are
still to be added. I have just found, on consulting the back files of
the _Times_, that Major Sholto, of Upper Norword, late of the 34th
Bombay Infantry, died upon the 28th of April, 1882.”

“I may be very obtuse, Holmes, but I fail to see what this suggests.”

“No? You surprise me. Look at it in this way, then. Captain Morstan
disappears. The only person in London whom he could have visited is
Major Sholto. Major Sholto denies having heard that he was in London.
Four years later Sholto dies. _Within a week of his death_ Captain
Morstan’s daughter receives a valuable present, which is repeated from
year to year, and now culminates in a letter which describes her as a
wronged woman. What wrong can it refer to except this deprivation of
her father? And why should the presents begin immediately after
Sholto’s death, unless it is that Sholto’s heir knows something of the
mystery and desires to make compensation? Have you any alternative
theory which will meet the facts?”

“But what a strange compensation! And how strangely made! Why, too,
should he write a letter now, rather than six years ago? Again, the
letter speaks of giving her justice. What justice can she have? It is
too much to suppose that her father is still alive. There is no other
injustice in her case that you know of.”

“There are difficulties; there are certainly difficulties,” said
Sherlock Holmes, pensively. “But our expedition of to-night will solve
them all. Ah, here is a four-wheeler, and Miss Morstan is inside. Are
you all ready? Then we had better go down, for it is a little past the
hour.”

I picked up my hat and my heaviest stick, but I observed that Holmes
took his revolver from his drawer and slipped it into his pocket. It
was clear that he thought that our night’s work might be a serious one.

Miss Morstan was muffled in a dark cloak, and her sensitive face was
composed, but pale. She must have been more than woman if she did not
feel some uneasiness at the strange enterprise upon which we were
embarking, yet her self-control was perfect, and she readily answered
the few additional questions which Sherlock Holmes put to her.

“Major Sholto was a very particular friend of papa’s,” she said. “His
letters were full of allusions to the major. He and papa were in
command of the troops at the Andaman Islands, so they were thrown a
great deal together. By the way, a curious paper was found in papa’s
desk which no one could understand. I don’t suppose that it is of the
slightest importance, but I thought you might care to see it, so I
brought it with me. It is here.”

Holmes unfolded the paper carefully and smoothed it out upon his knee.
He then very methodically examined it all over with his double lens.

“It is paper of native Indian manufacture,” he remarked. “It has at
some time been pinned to a board. The diagram upon it appears to be a
plan of part of a large building with numerous halls, corridors, and
passages. At one point is a small cross done in red ink, and above it
is ‘3.37 from left,’ in faded pencil-writing. In the left-hand corner
is a curious hieroglyphic like four crosses in a line with their arms
touching. Beside it is written, in very rough and coarse characters,
‘The sign of the four,—Jonathan Small, Mahomet Singh, Abdullah Khan,
Dost Akbar.’ No, I confess that I do not see how this bears upon the
matter. Yet it is evidently a document of importance. It has been kept
carefully in a pocket-book; for the one side is as clean as the other.”

“It was in his pocket-book that we found it.”

“Preserve it carefully, then, Miss Morstan, for it may prove to be of
use to us. I begin to suspect that this matter may turn out to be much
deeper and more subtle than I at first supposed. I must reconsider my
ideas.” He leaned back in the cab, and I could see by his drawn brow
and his vacant eye that he was thinking intently. Miss Morstan and I
chatted in an undertone about our present expedition and its possible
outcome, but our companion maintained his impenetrable reserve until
the end of our journey.

It was a September evening, and not yet seven o’clock, but the day had
been a dreary one, and a dense drizzly fog lay low upon the great city.
Mud-coloured clouds drooped sadly over the muddy streets. Down the
Strand the lamps were but misty splotches of diffused light which threw
a feeble circular glimmer upon the slimy pavement. The yellow glare
from the shop-windows streamed out into the steamy, vaporous air, and
threw a murky, shifting radiance across the crowded thoroughfare. There
was, to my mind, something eerie and ghost-like in the endless
procession of faces which flitted across these narrow bars of
light,—sad faces and glad, haggard and merry. Like all human kind, they
flitted from the gloom into the light, and so back into the gloom once
more. I am not subject to impressions, but the dull, heavy evening,
with the strange business upon which we were engaged, combined to make
me nervous and depressed. I could see from Miss Morstan’s manner that
she was suffering from the same feeling. Holmes alone could rise
superior to petty influences. He held his open note-book upon his knee,
and from time to time he jotted down figures and memoranda in the light
of his pocket-lantern.

At the Lyceum Theatre the crowds were already thick at the
side-entrances. In front a continuous stream of hansoms and
four-wheelers were rattling up, discharging their cargoes of
shirt-fronted men and beshawled, bediamonded women. We had hardly
reached the third pillar, which was our rendezvous, before a small,
dark, brisk man in the dress of a coachman accosted us.

“Are you the parties who come with Miss Morstan?” he asked.

“I am Miss Morstan, and these two gentlemen are my friends,” said she.

He bent a pair of wonderfully penetrating and questioning eyes upon us.
“You will excuse me, miss,” he said with a certain dogged manner, “but
I was to ask you to give me your word that neither of your companions
is a police-officer.”

“I give you my word on that,” she answered.

He gave a shrill whistle, on which a street Arab led across a
four-wheeler and opened the door. The man who had addressed us mounted
to the box, while we took our places inside. We had hardly done so
before the driver whipped up his horse, and we plunged away at a
furious pace through the foggy streets.

The situation was a curious one. We were driving to an unknown place,
on an unknown errand. Yet our invitation was either a complete
hoax,—which was an inconceivable hypothesis,—or else we had good reason
to think that important issues might hang upon our journey. Miss
Morstan’s demeanor was as resolute and collected as ever. I endeavored
to cheer and amuse her by reminiscences of my adventures in
Afghanistan; but, to tell the truth, I was myself so excited at our
situation and so curious as to our destination that my stories were
slightly involved. To this day she declares that I told her one moving
anecdote as to how a musket looked into my tent at the dead of night,
and how I fired a double-barrelled tiger cub at it. At first I had some
idea as to the direction in which we were driving; but soon, what with
our pace, the fog, and my own limited knowledge of London, I lost my
bearings, and knew nothing, save that we seemed to be going a very long
way. Sherlock Holmes was never at fault, however, and he muttered the
names as the cab rattled through squares and in and out by tortuous
by-streets.

“Rochester Row,” said he. “Now Vincent Square. Now we come out on the
Vauxhall Bridge Road. We are making for the Surrey side, apparently.
Yes, I thought so. Now we are on the bridge. You can catch glimpses of
the river.”

We did indeed get a fleeting view of a stretch of the Thames with the
lamps shining upon the broad, silent water; but our cab dashed on, and
was soon involved in a labyrinth of streets upon the other side.

“Wordsworth Road,” said my companion. “Priory Road. Lark Hall Lane.
Stockwell Place. Robert Street. Cold Harbor Lane. Our quest does not
appear to take us to very fashionable regions.”

We had, indeed, reached a questionable and forbidding neighbourhood.
Long lines of dull brick houses were only relieved by the coarse glare
and tawdry brilliancy of public houses at the corner. Then came rows of
two-storied villas each with a fronting of miniature garden, and then
again interminable lines of new staring brick buildings,—the monster
tentacles which the giant city was throwing out into the country. At
last the cab drew up at the third house in a new terrace. None of the
other houses were inhabited, and that at which we stopped was as dark
as its neighbours, save for a single glimmer in the kitchen window. On
our knocking, however, the door was instantly thrown open by a Hindoo
servant clad in a yellow turban, white loose-fitting clothes, and a
yellow sash. There was something strangely incongruous in this Oriental
figure framed in the commonplace doorway of a third-rate suburban
dwelling-house.

“The Sahib awaits you,” said he, and even as he spoke there came a high
piping voice from some inner room. “Show them in to me, khitmutgar,” it
cried. “Show them straight in to me.”




Chapter IV
The Story of the Bald-Headed Man


We followed the Indian down a sordid and common passage, ill-lit and
worse furnished, until he came to a door upon the right, which he threw
open. A blaze of yellow light streamed out upon us, and in the centre
of the glare there stood a small man with a very high head, a bristle
of red hair all round the fringe of it, and a bald, shining scalp which
shot out from among it like a mountain-peak from fir-trees. He writhed
his hands together as he stood, and his features were in a perpetual
jerk, now smiling, now scowling, but never for an instant in repose.
Nature had given him a pendulous lip, and a too visible line of yellow
and irregular teeth, which he strove feebly to conceal by constantly
passing his hand over the lower part of his face. In spite of his
obtrusive baldness, he gave the impression of youth. In point of fact
he had just turned his thirtieth year.

“Your servant, Miss Morstan,” he kept repeating, in a thin, high voice.
“Your servant, gentlemen. Pray step into my little sanctum. A small
place, miss, but furnished to my own liking. An oasis of art in the
howling desert of South London.”

We were all astonished by the appearance of the apartment into which he
invited us. In that sorry house it looked as out of place as a diamond
of the first water in a setting of brass. The richest and glossiest of
curtains and tapestries draped the walls, looped back here and there to
expose some richly-mounted painting or Oriental vase. The carpet was of
amber-and-black, so soft and so thick that the foot sank pleasantly
into it, as into a bed of moss. Two great tiger-skins thrown athwart it
increased the suggestion of Eastern luxury, as did a huge hookah which
stood upon a mat in the corner. A lamp in the fashion of a silver dove
was hung from an almost invisible golden wire in the centre of the
room. As it burned it filled the air with a subtle and aromatic odour.

“Mr. Thaddeus Sholto,” said the little man, still jerking and smiling.
“That is my name. You are Miss Morstan, of course. And these
gentlemen—”

“This is Mr. Sherlock Holmes, and this is Dr. Watson.”

“A doctor, eh?” cried he, much excited. “Have you your stethoscope?
Might I ask you—would you have the kindness? I have grave doubts as to
my mitral valve, if you would be so very good. The aortic I may rely
upon, but I should value your opinion upon the mitral.”

I listened to his heart, as requested, but was unable to find anything
amiss, save indeed that he was in an ecstasy of fear, for he shivered
from head to foot. “It appears to be normal,” I said. “You have no
cause for uneasiness.”

“You will excuse my anxiety, Miss Morstan,” he remarked, airily. “I am
a great sufferer, and I have long had suspicions as to that valve. I am
delighted to hear that they are unwarranted. Had your father, Miss
Morstan, refrained from throwing a strain upon his heart, he might have
been alive now.”

I could have struck the man across the face, so hot was I at this
callous and off-hand reference to so delicate a matter. Miss Morstan
sat down, and her face grew white to the lips. “I knew in my heart that
he was dead,” said she.

“I can give you every information,” said he, “and, what is more, I can
do you justice; and I will, too, whatever Brother Bartholomew may say.
I am so glad to have your friends here, not only as an escort to you,
but also as witnesses to what I am about to do and say. The three of us
can show a bold front to Brother Bartholomew. But let us have no
outsiders,—no police or officials. We can settle everything
satisfactorily among ourselves, without any interference. Nothing would
annoy Brother Bartholomew more than any publicity.” He sat down upon a
low settee and blinked at us inquiringly with his weak, watery blue
eyes.

“For my part,” said Holmes, “whatever you may choose to say will go no
further.”

I nodded to show my agreement.

“That is well! That is well!” said he. “May I offer you a glass of
Chianti, Miss Morstan? Or of Tokay? I keep no other wines. Shall I open
a flask? No? Well, then, I trust that you have no objection to
tobacco-smoke, to the mild balsamic odour of the Eastern tobacco. I am
a little nervous, and I find my hookah an invaluable sedative.” He
applied a taper to the great bowl, and the smoke bubbled merrily
through the rose-water. We sat all three in a semi-circle, with our
heads advanced, and our chins upon our hands, while the strange, jerky
little fellow, with his high, shining head, puffed uneasily in the
centre.

“When I first determined to make this communication to you,” said he,
“I might have given you my address, but I feared that you might
disregard my request and bring unpleasant people with you. I took the
liberty, therefore, of making an appointment in such a way that my man
Williams might be able to see you first. I have complete confidence in
his discretion, and he had orders, if he were dissatisfied, to proceed
no further in the matter. You will excuse these precautions, but I am a
man of somewhat retiring, and I might even say refined, tastes, and
there is nothing more unæsthetic than a policeman. I have a natural
shrinking from all forms of rough materialism. I seldom come in contact
with the rough crowd. I live, as you see, with some little atmosphere
of elegance around me. I may call myself a patron of the arts. It is my
weakness. The landscape is a genuine Corot, and, though a connoisseur
might perhaps throw a doubt upon that Salvator Rosa, there cannot be
the least question about the Bouguereau. I am partial to the modern
French school.”

“You will excuse me, Mr. Sholto,” said Miss Morstan, “but I am here at
your request to learn something which you desire to tell me. It is very
late, and I should desire the interview to be as short as possible.”

“At the best it must take some time,” he answered; “for we shall
certainly have to go to Norwood and see Brother Bartholomew. We shall
all go and try if we can get the better of Brother Bartholomew. He is
very angry with me for taking the course which has seemed right to me.
I had quite high words with him last night. You cannot imagine what a
terrible fellow he is when he is angry.”

“If we are to go to Norwood it would perhaps be as well to start at
once,” I ventured to remark.

He laughed until his ears were quite red. “That would hardly do,” he
cried. “I don’t know what he would say if I brought you in that sudden
way. No, I must prepare you by showing you how we all stand to each
other. In the first place, I must tell you that there are several
points in the story of which I am myself ignorant. I can only lay the
facts before you as far as I know them myself.

“My father was, as you may have guessed, Major John Sholto, once of the
Indian army. He retired some eleven years ago, and came to live at
Pondicherry Lodge in Upper Norwood. He had prospered in India, and
brought back with him a considerable sum of money, a large collection
of valuable curiosities, and a staff of native servants. With these
advantages he bought himself a house, and lived in great luxury. My
twin-brother Bartholomew and I were the only children.

“I very well remember the sensation which was caused by the
disappearance of Captain Morstan. We read the details in the papers,
and, knowing that he had been a friend of our father’s, we discussed
the case freely in his presence. He used to join in our speculations as
to what could have happened. Never for an instant did we suspect that
he had the whole secret hidden in his own breast,—that of all men he
alone knew the fate of Arthur Morstan.

“We did know, however, that some mystery—some positive danger—overhung
our father. He was very fearful of going out alone, and he always
employed two prize-fighters to act as porters at Pondicherry Lodge.
Williams, who drove you to-night, was one of them. He was once
light-weight champion of England. Our father would never tell us what
it was he feared, but he had a most marked aversion to men with wooden
legs. On one occasion he actually fired his revolver at a wooden-legged
man, who proved to be a harmless tradesman canvassing for orders. We
had to pay a large sum to hush the matter up. My brother and I used to
think this a mere whim of my father’s, but events have since led us to
change our opinion.

“Early in 1882 my father received a letter from India which was a great
shock to him. He nearly fainted at the breakfast-table when he opened
it, and from that day he sickened to his death. What was in the letter
we could never discover, but I could see as he held it that it was
short and written in a scrawling hand. He had suffered for years from
an enlarged spleen, but he now became rapidly worse, and towards the
end of April we were informed that he was beyond all hope, and that he
wished to make a last communication to us.

“When we entered his room he was propped up with pillows and breathing
heavily. He besought us to lock the door and to come upon either side
of the bed. Then, grasping our hands, he made a remarkable statement to
us, in a voice which was broken as much by emotion as by pain. I shall
try and give it to you in his own very words.

“‘I have only one thing,’ he said, ‘which weighs upon my mind at this
supreme moment. It is my treatment of poor Morstan’s orphan. The cursed
greed which has been my besetting sin through life has withheld from
her the treasure, half at least of which should have been hers. And yet
I have made no use of it myself,—so blind and foolish a thing is
avarice. The mere feeling of possession has been so dear to me that I
could not bear to share it with another. See that chaplet dipped with
pearls beside the quinine-bottle. Even that I could not bear to part
with, although I had got it out with the design of sending it to her.
You, my sons, will give her a fair share of the Agra treasure. But send
her nothing—not even the chaplet—until I am gone. After all, men have
been as bad as this and have recovered.

“‘I will tell you how Morstan died,’ he continued. ‘He had suffered for
years from a weak heart, but he concealed it from every one. I alone
knew it. When in India, he and I, through a remarkable chain of
circumstances, came into possession of a considerable treasure. I
brought it over to England, and on the night of Morstan’s arrival he
came straight over here to claim his share. He walked over from the
station, and was admitted by my faithful old Lal Chowdar, who is now
dead. Morstan and I had a difference of opinion as to the division of
the treasure, and we came to heated words. Morstan had sprung out of
his chair in a paroxysm of anger, when he suddenly pressed his hand to
his side, his face turned a dusky hue, and he fell backwards, cutting
his head against the corner of the treasure-chest. When I stooped over
him I found, to my horror, that he was dead.

“‘For a long time I sat half distracted, wondering what I should do. My
first impulse was, of course, to call for assistance; but I could not
but recognise that there was every chance that I would be accused of
his murder. His death at the moment of a quarrel, and the gash in his
head, would be black against me. Again, an official inquiry could not
be made without bringing out some facts about the treasure, which I was
particularly anxious to keep secret. He had told me that no soul upon
earth knew where he had gone. There seemed to be no necessity why any
soul ever should know.

“‘I was still pondering over the matter, when, looking up, I saw my
servant, Lal Chowdar, in the doorway. He stole in and bolted the door
behind him. “Do not fear, Sahib,” he said. “No one need know that you
have killed him. Let us hide him away, and who is the wiser?” “I did
not kill him,” said I. Lal Chowdar shook his head and smiled. “I heard
it all, Sahib,” said he. “I heard you quarrel, and I heard the blow.
But my lips are sealed. All are asleep in the house. Let us put him
away together.” That was enough to decide me. If my own servant could
not believe my innocence, how could I hope to make it good before
twelve foolish tradesmen in a jury-box? Lal Chowdar and I disposed of
the body that night, and within a few days the London papers were full
of the mysterious disappearance of Captain Morstan. You will see from
what I say that I can hardly be blamed in the matter. My fault lies in
the fact that we concealed not only the body, but also the treasure,
and that I have clung to Morstan’s share as well as to my own. I wish
you, therefore, to make restitution. Put your ears down to my mouth.
The treasure is hidden in—’

“At this instant a horrible change came over his expression; his eyes
stared wildly, his jaw dropped, and he yelled, in a voice which I can
never forget, ‘Keep him out! For Christ’s sake keep him out!’ We both
stared round at the window behind us upon which his gaze was fixed. A
face was looking in at us out of the darkness. We could see the
whitening of the nose where it was pressed against the glass. It was a
bearded, hairy face, with wild cruel eyes and an expression of
concentrated malevolence. My brother and I rushed towards the window,
but the man was gone. When we returned to my father his head had
dropped and his pulse had ceased to beat.

“We searched the garden that night, but found no sign of the intruder,
save that just under the window a single footmark was visible in the
flower-bed. But for that one trace, we might have thought that our
imaginations had conjured up that wild, fierce face. We soon, however,
had another and a more striking proof that there were secret agencies
at work all round us. The window of my father’s room was found open in
the morning, his cupboards and boxes had been rifled, and upon his
chest was fixed a torn piece of paper, with the words ‘The sign of the
four’ scrawled across it. What the phrase meant, or who our secret
visitor may have been, we never knew. As far as we can judge, none of
my father’s property had been actually stolen, though everything had
been turned out. My brother and I naturally associated this peculiar
incident with the fear which haunted my father during his life; but it
is still a complete mystery to us.”

The little man stopped to relight his hookah and puffed thoughtfully
for a few moments. We had all sat absorbed, listening to his
extraordinary narrative. At the short account of her father’s death
Miss Morstan had turned deadly white, and for a moment I feared that
she was about to faint. She rallied however, on drinking a glass of
water which I quietly poured out for her from a Venetian carafe upon
the side-table. Sherlock Holmes leaned back in his chair with an
abstracted expression and the lids drawn low over his glittering eyes.
As I glanced at him I could not but think how on that very day he had
complained bitterly of the commonplaceness of life. Here at least was a
problem which would tax his sagacity to the utmost. Mr. Thaddeus Sholto
looked from one to the other of us with an obvious pride at the effect
which his story had produced, and then continued between the puffs of
his overgrown pipe.

“My brother and I,” said he, “were, as you may imagine, much excited as
to the treasure which my father had spoken of. For weeks and for months
we dug and delved in every part of the garden, without discovering its
whereabouts. It was maddening to think that the hiding-place was on his
very lips at the moment that he died. We could judge the splendour of
the missing riches by the chaplet which he had taken out. Over this
chaplet my brother Bartholomew and I had some little discussion. The
pearls were evidently of great value, and he was averse to part with
them, for, between friends, my brother was himself a little inclined to
my father’s fault. He thought, too, that if we parted with the chaplet
it might give rise to gossip and finally bring us into trouble. It was
all that I could do to persuade him to let me find out Miss Morstan’s
address and send her a detached pearl at fixed intervals, so that at
least she might never feel destitute.”

“It was a kindly thought,” said our companion, earnestly. “It was
extremely good of you.”

The little man waved his hand deprecatingly. “We were your trustees,”
he said. “That was the view which I took of it, though Brother
Bartholomew could not altogether see it in that light. We had plenty of
money ourselves. I desired no more. Besides, it would have been such
bad taste to have treated a young lady in so scurvy a fashion. ‘Le
mauvais goût mène au crime.’ The French have a very neat way of putting
these things. Our difference of opinion on this subject went so far
that I thought it best to set up rooms for myself: so I left
Pondicherry Lodge, taking the old khitmutgar and Williams with me.
Yesterday, however, I learn that an event of extreme importance has
occurred. The treasure has been discovered. I instantly communicated
with Miss Morstan, and it only remains for us to drive out to Norwood
and demand our share. I explained my views last night to Brother
Bartholomew: so we shall be expected, if not welcome, visitors.”

Mr. Thaddeus Sholto ceased, and sat twitching on his luxurious settee.
We all remained silent, with our thoughts upon the new development
which the mysterious business had taken. Holmes was the first to spring
to his feet.

“You have done well, sir, from first to last,” said he. “It is possible
that we may be able to make you some small return by throwing some
light upon that which is still dark to you. But, as Miss Morstan
remarked just now, it is late, and we had best put the matter through
without delay.”

Our new acquaintance very deliberately coiled up the tube of his
hookah, and produced from behind a curtain a very long befrogged
topcoat with Astrakhan collar and cuffs. This he buttoned tightly up,
in spite of the extreme closeness of the night, and finished his attire
by putting on a rabbit-skin cap with hanging lappets which covered the
ears, so that no part of him was visible save his mobile and peaky
face. “My health is somewhat fragile,” he remarked, as he led the way
down the passage. “I am compelled to be a valetudinarian.”

Our cab was awaiting us outside, and our programme was evidently
prearranged, for the driver started off at once at a rapid pace.
Thaddeus Sholto talked incessantly, in a voice which rose high above
the rattle of the wheels.

“Bartholomew is a clever fellow,” said he. “How do you think he found
out where the treasure was? He had come to the conclusion that it was
somewhere indoors: so he worked out all the cubic space of the house,
and made measurements everywhere, so that not one inch should be
unaccounted for. Among other things, he found that the height of the
building was seventy-four feet, but on adding together the heights of
all the separate rooms, and making every allowance for the space
between, which he ascertained by borings, he could not bring the total
to more than seventy feet. There were four feet unaccounted for. These
could only be at the top of the building. He knocked a hole, therefore,
in the lath-and-plaster ceiling of the highest room, and there, sure
enough, he came upon another little garret above it, which had been
sealed up and was known to no one. In the centre stood the
treasure-chest, resting upon two rafters. He lowered it through the
hole, and there it lies. He computes the value of the jewels at not
less than half a million sterling.”

At the mention of this gigantic sum we all stared at one another
open-eyed. Miss Morstan, could we secure her rights, would change from
a needy governess to the richest heiress in England. Surely it was the
place of a loyal friend to rejoice at such news; yet I am ashamed to
say that selfishness took me by the soul, and that my heart turned as
heavy as lead within me. I stammered out some few halting words of
congratulation, and then sat downcast, with my head drooped, deaf to
the babble of our new acquaintance. He was clearly a confirmed
hypochondriac, and I was dreamily conscious that he was pouring forth
interminable trains of symptoms, and imploring information as to the
composition and action of innumerable quack nostrums, some of which he
bore about in a leather case in his pocket. I trust that he may not
remember any of the answers which I gave him that night. Holmes
declares that he overheard me caution him against the great danger of
taking more than two drops of castor oil, while I recommended
strychnine in large doses as a sedative. However that may be, I was
certainly relieved when our cab pulled up with a jerk and the coachman
sprang down to open the door.

“This, Miss Morstan, is Pondicherry Lodge,” said Mr. Thaddeus Sholto,
as he handed her out.




Chapter V
The Tragedy of Pondicherry Lodge


It was nearly eleven o’clock when we reached this final stage of our
night’s adventures. We had left the damp fog of the great city behind
us, and the night was fairly fine. A warm wind blew from the westward,
and heavy clouds moved slowly across the sky, with half a moon peeping
occasionally through the rifts. It was clear enough to see for some
distance, but Thaddeus Sholto took down one of the side-lamps from the
carriage to give us a better light upon our way.

Pondicherry Lodge stood in its own grounds, and was girt round with a
very high stone wall topped with broken glass. A single narrow
iron-clamped door formed the only means of entrance. On this our guide
knocked with a peculiar postman-like rat-tat.

“Who is there?” cried a gruff voice from within.

“It is I, McMurdo. You surely know my knock by this time.”

There was a grumbling sound and a clanking and jarring of keys. The
door swung heavily back, and a short, deep-chested man stood in the
opening, with the yellow light of the lantern shining upon his
protruded face and twinkling distrustful eyes.

“That you, Mr. Thaddeus? But who are the others? I had no orders about
them from the master.”

“No, McMurdo? You surprise me! I told my brother last night that I
should bring some friends.”

“He ain’t been out o’ his room to-day, Mr. Thaddeus, and I have no
orders. You know very well that I must stick to regulations. I can let
you in, but your friends must just stop where they are.”

This was an unexpected obstacle. Thaddeus Sholto looked about him in a
perplexed and helpless manner. “This is too bad of you, McMurdo!” he
said. “If I guarantee them, that is enough for you. There is the young
lady, too. She cannot wait on the public road at this hour.”

“Very sorry, Mr. Thaddeus,” said the porter, inexorably. “Folk may be
friends o’ yours, and yet no friends o’ the master’s. He pays me well
to do my duty, and my duty I’ll do. I don’t know none o’ your friends.”

“Oh, yes you do, McMurdo,” cried Sherlock Holmes, genially. “I don’t
think you can have forgotten me. Don’t you remember the amateur who
fought three rounds with you at Alison’s rooms on the night of your
benefit four years back?”

“Not Mr. Sherlock Holmes!” roared the prize-fighter. “God’s truth! how
could I have mistook you? If instead o’ standin’ there so quiet you had
just stepped up and given me that cross-hit of yours under the jaw, I’d
ha’ known you without a question. Ah, you’re one that has wasted your
gifts, you have! You might have aimed high, if you had joined the
fancy.”

“You see, Watson, if all else fails me I have still one of the
scientific professions open to me,” said Holmes, laughing. “Our friend
won’t keep us out in the cold now, I am sure.”

“In you come, sir, in you come,—you and your friends,” he answered.
“Very sorry, Mr. Thaddeus, but orders are very strict. Had to be
certain of your friends before I let them in.”

Inside, a gravel path wound through desolate grounds to a huge clump of
a house, square and prosaic, all plunged in shadow save where a
moonbeam struck one corner and glimmered in a garret window. The vast
size of the building, with its gloom and its deathly silence, struck a
chill to the heart. Even Thaddeus Sholto seemed ill at ease, and the
lantern quivered and rattled in his hand.

“I cannot understand it,” he said. “There must be some mistake. I
distinctly told Bartholomew that we should be here, and yet there is no
light in his window. I do not know what to make of it.”

“Does he always guard the premises in this way?” asked Holmes.

“Yes; he has followed my father’s custom. He was the favourite son, you
know, and I sometimes think that my father may have told him more than
he ever told me. That is Bartholomew’s window up there where the
moonshine strikes. It is quite bright, but there is no light from
within, I think.”

“None,” said Holmes. “But I see the glint of a light in that little
window beside the door.”

“Ah, that is the housekeeper’s room. That is where old Mrs. Bernstone
sits. She can tell us all about it. But perhaps you would not mind
waiting here for a minute or two, for if we all go in together and she
has no word of our coming she may be alarmed. But hush! what is that?”

He held up the lantern, and his hand shook until the circles of light
flickered and wavered all round us. Miss Morstan seized my wrist, and
we all stood with thumping hearts, straining our ears. From the great
black house there sounded through the silent night the saddest and most
pitiful of sounds,—the shrill, broken whimpering of a frightened woman.

“It is Mrs. Bernstone,” said Sholto. “She is the only woman in the
house. Wait here. I shall be back in a moment.” He hurried for the
door, and knocked in his peculiar way. We could see a tall old woman
admit him, and sway with pleasure at the very sight of him.

“Oh, Mr. Thaddeus, sir, I am so glad you have come! I am so glad you
have come, Mr. Thaddeus, sir!” We heard her reiterated rejoicings until
the door was closed and her voice died away into a muffled monotone.

Our guide had left us the lantern. Holmes swung it slowly round, and
peered keenly at the house, and at the great rubbish-heaps which
cumbered the grounds. Miss Morstan and I stood together, and her hand
was in mine. A wondrous subtle thing is love, for here were we two who
had never seen each other before that day, between whom no word or even
look of affection had ever passed, and yet now in an hour of trouble
our hands instinctively sought for each other. I have marvelled at it
since, but at the time it seemed the most natural thing that I should
go out to her so, and, as she has often told me, there was in her also
the instinct to turn to me for comfort and protection. So we stood hand
in hand, like two children, and there was peace in our hearts for all
the dark things that surrounded us.

“What a strange place!” she said, looking round.

“It looks as though all the moles in England had been let loose in it.
I have seen something of the sort on the side of a hill near Ballarat,
where the prospectors had been at work.”

“And from the same cause,” said Holmes. “These are the traces of the
treasure-seekers. You must remember that they were six years looking
for it. No wonder that the grounds look like a gravel-pit.”

At that moment the door of the house burst open, and Thaddeus Sholto
came running out, with his hands thrown forward and terror in his eyes.

“There is something amiss with Bartholomew!” he cried. “I am
frightened! My nerves cannot stand it.” He was, indeed, half blubbering
with fear, and his twitching feeble face peeping out from the great
Astrakhan collar had the helpless appealing expression of a terrified
child.

“Come into the house,” said Holmes, in his crisp, firm way.

“Yes, do!” pleaded Thaddeus Sholto. “I really do not feel equal to
giving directions.”

We all followed him into the housekeeper’s room, which stood upon the
left-hand side of the passage. The old woman was pacing up and down
with a scared look and restless picking fingers, but the sight of Miss
Morstan appeared to have a soothing effect upon her.

“God bless your sweet calm face!” she cried, with an hysterical sob.
“It does me good to see you. Oh, but I have been sorely tried this
day!”

Our companion patted her thin, work-worn hand, and murmured some few
words of kindly womanly comfort which brought the colour back into the
other’s bloodless cheeks.

“Master has locked himself in and will not answer me,” she explained.
“All day I have waited to hear from him, for he often likes to be
alone; but an hour ago I feared that something was amiss, so I went up
and peeped through the key-hole. You must go up, Mr. Thaddeus,—you must
go up and look for yourself. I have seen Mr. Bartholomew Sholto in joy
and in sorrow for ten long years, but I never saw him with such a face
on him as that.”

Sherlock Holmes took the lamp and led the way, for Thaddeus Sholto’s
teeth were chattering in his head. So shaken was he that I had to pass
my hand under his arm as we went up the stairs, for his knees were
trembling under him. Twice as we ascended Holmes whipped his lens out
of his pocket and carefully examined marks which appeared to me to be
mere shapeless smudges of dust upon the cocoa-nut matting which served
as a stair-carpet. He walked slowly from step to step, holding the
lamp, and shooting keen glances to right and left. Miss Morstan had
remained behind with the frightened housekeeper.

The third flight of stairs ended in a straight passage of some length,
with a great picture in Indian tapestry upon the right of it and three
doors upon the left. Holmes advanced along it in the same slow and
methodical way, while we kept close at his heels, with our long black
shadows streaming backwards down the corridor. The third door was that
which we were seeking. Holmes knocked without receiving any answer, and
then tried to turn the handle and force it open. It was locked on the
inside, however, and by a broad and powerful bolt, as we could see when
we set our lamp up against it. The key being turned, however, the hole
was not entirely closed. Sherlock Holmes bent down to it, and instantly
rose again with a sharp intaking of the breath.

“There is something devilish in this, Watson,” said he, more moved than
I had ever before seen him. “What do you make of it?”

I stooped to the hole, and recoiled in horror. Moonlight was streaming
into the room, and it was bright with a vague and shifty radiance.
Looking straight at me, and suspended, as it were, in the air, for all
beneath was in shadow, there hung a face,—the very face of our
companion Thaddeus. There was the same high, shining head, the same
circular bristle of red hair, the same bloodless countenance. The
features were set, however, in a horrible smile, a fixed and unnatural
grin, which in that still and moonlit room was more jarring to the
nerves than any scowl or contortion. So like was the face to that of
our little friend that I looked round at him to make sure that he was
indeed with us. Then I recalled to mind that he had mentioned to us
that his brother and he were twins.

“This is terrible!” I said to Holmes. “What is to be done?”

“The door must come down,” he answered, and, springing against it, he
put all his weight upon the lock. It creaked and groaned, but did not
yield. Together we flung ourselves upon it once more, and this time it
gave way with a sudden snap, and we found ourselves within Bartholomew
Sholto’s chamber.

It appeared to have been fitted up as a chemical laboratory. A double
line of glass-stoppered bottles was drawn up upon the wall opposite the
door, and the table was littered over with Bunsen burners, test-tubes,
and retorts. In the corners stood carboys of acid in wicker baskets.
One of these appeared to leak or to have been broken, for a stream of
dark-coloured liquid had trickled out from it, and the air was heavy
with a peculiarly pungent, tar-like odour. A set of steps stood at one
side of the room, in the midst of a litter of lath and plaster, and
above them there was an opening in the ceiling large enough for a man
to pass through. At the foot of the steps a long coil of rope was
thrown carelessly together.

By the table, in a wooden arm-chair, the master of the house was seated
all in a heap, with his head sunk upon his left shoulder, and that
ghastly, inscrutable smile upon his face. He was stiff and cold, and
had clearly been dead many hours. It seemed to me that not only his
features but all his limbs were twisted and turned in the most
fantastic fashion. By his hand upon the table there lay a peculiar
instrument,—a brown, close-grained stick, with a stone head like a
hammer, rudely lashed on with coarse twine. Beside it was a torn sheet
of note-paper with some words scrawled upon it. Holmes glanced at it,
and then handed it to me.

“You see,” he said, with a significant raising of the eyebrows.

In the light of the lantern I read, with a thrill of horror, “The sign
of the four.”

“In God’s name, what does it all mean?” I asked.

“It means murder,” said he, stooping over the dead man. “Ah, I expected
it. Look here!” He pointed to what looked like a long, dark thorn stuck
in the skin just above the ear.

“It looks like a thorn,” said I.

“It is a thorn. You may pick it out. But be careful, for it is
poisoned.”

I took it up between my finger and thumb. It came away from the skin so
readily that hardly any mark was left behind. One tiny speck of blood
showed where the puncture had been.

“This is all an insoluble mystery to me,” said I. “It grows darker
instead of clearer.”

“On the contrary,” he answered, “it clears every instant. I only
require a few missing links to have an entirely connected case.”

We had almost forgotten our companion’s presence since we entered the
chamber. He was still standing in the doorway, the very picture of
terror, wringing his hands and moaning to himself. Suddenly, however,
he broke out into a sharp, querulous cry.

“The treasure is gone!” he said. “They have robbed him of the treasure!
There is the hole through which we lowered it. I helped him to do it! I
was the last person who saw him! I left him here last night, and I
heard him lock the door as I came downstairs.”

“What time was that?”

“It was ten o’clock. And now he is dead, and the police will be called
in, and I shall be suspected of having had a hand in it. Oh, yes, I am
sure I shall. But you don’t think so, gentlemen? Surely you don’t think
that it was I? Is it likely that I would have brought you here if it
were I? Oh, dear! oh, dear! I know that I shall go mad!” He jerked his
arms and stamped his feet in a kind of convulsive frenzy.

“You have no reason for fear, Mr. Sholto,” said Holmes, kindly, putting
his hand upon his shoulder. “Take my advice, and drive down to the
station to report this matter to the police. Offer to assist them in
every way. We shall wait here until your return.”

The little man obeyed in a half-stupefied fashion, and we heard him
stumbling down the stairs in the dark.




Chapter VI
Sherlock Holmes Gives a Demonstration


“Now, Watson,” said Holmes, rubbing his hands, “we have half an hour to
ourselves. Let us make good use of it. My case is, as I have told you,
almost complete; but we must not err on the side of over-confidence.
Simple as the case seems now, there may be something deeper underlying
it.”

“Simple!” I ejaculated.

“Surely,” said he, with something of the air of a clinical professor
expounding to his class. “Just sit in the corner there, that your
footprints may not complicate matters. Now to work! In the first place,
how did these folk come, and how did they go? The door has not been
opened since last night. How of the window?” He carried the lamp across
to it, muttering his observations aloud the while, but addressing them
to himself rather than to me. “Window is snibbed on the inner side.
Framework is solid. No hinges at the side. Let us open it. No
water-pipe near. Roof quite out of reach. Yet a man has mounted by the
window. It rained a little last night. Here is the print of a foot in
mould upon the sill. And here is a circular muddy mark, and here again
upon the floor, and here again by the table. See here, Watson! This is
really a very pretty demonstration.”

I looked at the round, well-defined muddy discs. “This is not a
footmark,” said I.

“It is something much more valuable to us. It is the impression of a
wooden stump. You see here on the sill is the boot-mark, a heavy boot
with the broad metal heel, and beside it is the mark of the
timber-toe.”

“It is the wooden-legged man.”

“Quite so. But there has been some one else,—a very able and efficient
ally. Could you scale that wall, doctor?”

I looked out of the open window. The moon still shone brightly on that
angle of the house. We were a good sixty feet from the ground, and,
look where I would, I could see no foothold, nor as much as a crevice
in the brick-work.

“It is absolutely impossible,” I answered.

“Without aid it is so. But suppose you had a friend up here who lowered
you this good stout rope which I see in the corner, securing one end of
it to this great hook in the wall. Then, I think, if you were an active
man, You might swarm up, wooden leg and all. You would depart, of
course, in the same fashion, and your ally would draw up the rope,
untie it from the hook, shut the window, snib it on the inside, and get
away in the way that he originally came. As a minor point it may be
noted,” he continued, fingering the rope, “that our wooden-legged
friend, though a fair climber, was not a professional sailor. His hands
were far from horny. My lens discloses more than one blood-mark,
especially towards the end of the rope, from which I gather that he
slipped down with such velocity that he took the skin off his hand.”

“This is all very well,” said I, “but the thing becomes more
unintelligible than ever. How about this mysterious ally? How came he
into the room?”

“Yes, the ally!” repeated Holmes, pensively. “There are features of
interest about this ally. He lifts the case from the regions of the
commonplace. I fancy that this ally breaks fresh ground in the annals
of crime in this country,—though parallel cases suggest themselves from
India, and, if my memory serves me, from Senegambia.”

“How came he, then?” I reiterated. “The door is locked, the window is
inaccessible. Was it through the chimney?”

“The grate is much too small,” he answered. “I had already considered
that possibility.”

“How then?” I persisted.

“You will not apply my precept,” he said, shaking his head. “How often
have I said to you that when you have eliminated the impossible
whatever remains, _however improbable_, must be the truth? We know that
he did not come through the door, the window, or the chimney. We also
know that he could not have been concealed in the room, as there is no
concealment possible. Whence, then, did he come?”

“He came through the hole in the roof,” I cried.

“Of course he did. He must have done so. If you will have the kindness
to hold the lamp for me, we shall now extend our researches to the room
above,—the secret room in which the treasure was found.”

He mounted the steps, and, seizing a rafter with either hand, he swung
himself up into the garret. Then, lying on his face, he reached down
for the lamp and held it while I followed him.

The chamber in which we found ourselves was about ten feet one way and
six the other. The floor was formed by the rafters, with thin
lath-and-plaster between, so that in walking one had to step from beam
to beam. The roof ran up to an apex, and was evidently the inner shell
of the true roof of the house. There was no furniture of any sort, and
the accumulated dust of years lay thick upon the floor.

“Here you are, you see,” said Sherlock Holmes, putting his hand against
the sloping wall. “This is a trap-door which leads out on to the roof.
I can press it back, and here is the roof itself, sloping at a gentle
angle. This, then, is the way by which Number One entered. Let us see
if we can find any other traces of his individuality.”

He held down the lamp to the floor, and as he did so I saw for the
second time that night a startled, surprised look come over his face.
For myself, as I followed his gaze my skin was cold under my clothes.
The floor was covered thickly with the prints of a naked foot,—clear,
well defined, perfectly formed, but scarce half the size of those of an
ordinary man.

“Holmes,” I said, in a whisper, “a child has done the horrid thing.”

He had recovered his self-possession in an instant. “I was staggered
for the moment,” he said, “but the thing is quite natural. My memory
failed me, or I should have been able to foretell it. There is nothing
more to be learned here. Let us go down.”

“What is your theory, then, as to those footmarks?” I asked, eagerly,
when we had regained the lower room once more.

“My dear Watson, try a little analysis yourself,” said he, with a touch
of impatience. “You know my methods. Apply them, and it will be
instructive to compare results.”

“I cannot conceive anything which will cover the facts,” I answered.

“It will be clear enough to you soon,” he said, in an off-hand way. “I
think that there is nothing else of importance here, but I will look.”
He whipped out his lens and a tape measure, and hurried about the room
on his knees, measuring, comparing, examining, with his long thin nose
only a few inches from the planks, and his beady eyes gleaming and
deep-set like those of a bird. So swift, silent, and furtive were his
movements, like those of a trained blood-hound picking out a scent,
that I could not but think what a terrible criminal he would have made
had he turned his energy and sagacity against the law, instead of
exerting them in its defence. As he hunted about, he kept muttering to
himself, and finally he broke out into a loud crow of delight.

“We are certainly in luck,” said he. “We ought to have very little
trouble now. Number One has had the misfortune to tread in the
creosote. You can see the outline of the edge of his small foot here at
the side of this evil-smelling mess. The carboy has been cracked, You
see, and the stuff has leaked out.”

“What then?” I asked.

“Why, we have got him, that’s all,” said he. “I know a dog that would
follow that scent to the world’s end. If a pack can track a trailed
herring across a shire, how far can a specially-trained hound follow so
pungent a smell as this? It sounds like a sum in the rule of three. The
answer should give us the—But halloa! here are the accredited
representatives of the law.”

Heavy steps and the clamour of loud voices were audible from below, and
the hall door shut with a loud crash.

“Before they come,” said Holmes, “just put your hand here on this poor
fellow’s arm, and here on his leg. What do you feel?”

“The muscles are as hard as a board,” I answered.

“Quite so. They are in a state of extreme contraction, far exceeding
the usual _rigor mortis_. Coupled with this distortion of the face,
this Hippocratic smile, or ‘_risus sardonicus_,’ as the old writers
called it, what conclusion would it suggest to your mind?”

“Death from some powerful vegetable alkaloid,” I answered,—“some
strychnine-like substance which would produce tetanus.”

“That was the idea which occurred to me the instant I saw the drawn
muscles of the face. On getting into the room I at once looked for the
means by which the poison had entered the system. As you saw, I
discovered a thorn which had been driven or shot with no great force
into the scalp. You observe that the part struck was that which would
be turned towards the hole in the ceiling if the man were erect in his
chair. Now examine the thorn.”

I took it up gingerly and held it in the light of the lantern. It was
long, sharp, and black, with a glazed look near the point as though
some gummy substance had dried upon it. The blunt end had been trimmed
and rounded off with a knife.

“Is that an English thorn?” he asked.

“No, it certainly is not.”

“With all these data you should be able to draw some just inference.
But here are the regulars; so the auxiliary forces may beat a retreat.”

As he spoke, the steps which had been coming nearer sounded loudly on
the passage, and a very stout, portly man in a grey suit strode heavily
into the room. He was red-faced, burly and plethoric, with a pair of
very small twinkling eyes which looked keenly out from between swollen
and puffy pouches. He was closely followed by an inspector in uniform,
and by the still palpitating Thaddeus Sholto.

“Here’s a business!” he cried, in a muffled, husky voice. “Here’s a
pretty business! But who are all these? Why, the house seems to be as
full as a rabbit-warren!”

“I think you must recollect me, Mr. Athelney Jones,” said Holmes,
quietly.

“Why, of course I do!” he wheezed. “It’s Mr. Sherlock Holmes, the
theorist. Remember you! I’ll never forget how you lectured us all on
causes and inferences and effects in the Bishopgate jewel case. It’s
true you set us on the right track; but you’ll own now that it was more
by good luck than good guidance.”

“It was a piece of very simple reasoning.”

“Oh, come, now, come! Never be ashamed to own up. But what is all this?
Bad business! Bad business! Stern facts here,—no room for theories. How
lucky that I happened to be out at Norwood over another case! I was at
the station when the message arrived. What d’you think the man died
of?”

“Oh, this is hardly a case for me to theorise over,” said Holmes,
dryly.

“No, no. Still, we can’t deny that you hit the nail on the head
sometimes. Dear me! Door locked, I understand. Jewels worth half a
million missing. How was the window?”

“Fastened; but there are steps on the sill.”

“Well, well, if it was fastened the steps could have nothing to do with
the matter. That’s common sense. Man might have died in a fit; but then
the jewels are missing. Ha! I have a theory. These flashes come upon me
at times.—Just step outside, sergeant, and you, Mr. Sholto. Your friend
can remain.—What do you think of this, Holmes? Sholto was, on his own
confession, with his brother last night. The brother died in a fit, on
which Sholto walked off with the treasure. How’s that?”

“On which the dead man very considerately got up and locked the door on
the inside.”

“Hum! There’s a flaw there. Let us apply common sense to the matter.
This Thaddeus Sholto _was_ with his brother; there _was_ a quarrel; so
much we know. The brother is dead and the jewels are gone. So much also
we know. No one saw the brother from the time Thaddeus left him. His
bed had not been slept in. Thaddeus is evidently in a most disturbed
state of mind. His appearance is—well, not attractive. You see that I
am weaving my web round Thaddeus. The net begins to close upon him.”

“You are not quite in possession of the facts yet,” said Holmes. “This
splinter of wood, which I have every reason to believe to be poisoned,
was in the man’s scalp where you still see the mark; this card,
inscribed as you see it, was on the table; and beside it lay this
rather curious stone-headed instrument. How does all that fit into your
theory?”

“Confirms it in every respect,” said the fat detective, pompously.
“House is full of Indian curiosities. Thaddeus brought this up, and if
this splinter be poisonous Thaddeus may as well have made murderous use
of it as any other man. The card is some hocus-pocus,—a blind, as like
as not. The only question is, how did he depart? Ah, of course, here is
a hole in the roof.” With great activity, considering his bulk, he
sprang up the steps and squeezed through into the garret, and
immediately afterwards we heard his exulting voice proclaiming that he
had found the trap-door.

“He can find something,” remarked Holmes, shrugging his shoulders. “He
has occasional glimmerings of reason. _Il n’y a pas des sots si
incommodes que ceux qui ont de l’esprit!_”

“You see!” said Athelney Jones, reappearing down the steps again.
“Facts are better than mere theories, after all. My view of the case is
confirmed. There is a trap-door communicating with the roof, and it is
partly open.”

“It was I who opened it.”

“Oh, indeed! You did notice it, then?” He seemed a little crestfallen
at the discovery. “Well, whoever noticed it, it shows how our gentleman
got away. Inspector!”

“Yes, sir,” from the passage.

“Ask Mr. Sholto to step this way.—Mr. Sholto, it is my duty to inform
you that anything which you may say will be used against you. I arrest
you in the Queen’s name as being concerned in the death of your
brother.”

“There, now! Didn’t I tell you!” cried the poor little man, throwing
out his hands, and looking from one to the other of us.

“Don’t trouble yourself about it, Mr. Sholto,” said Holmes. “I think
that I can engage to clear you of the charge.”

“Don’t promise too much, Mr. Theorist,—don’t promise too much!” snapped
the detective. “You may find it a harder matter than you think.”

“Not only will I clear him, Mr. Jones, but I will make you a free
present of the name and description of one of the two people who were
in this room last night. His name, I have every reason to believe, is
Jonathan Small. He is a poorly-educated man, small, active, with his
right leg off, and wearing a wooden stump which is worn away upon the
inner side. His left boot has a coarse, square-toed sole, with an iron
band round the heel. He is a middle-aged man, much sunburned, and has
been a convict. These few indications may be of some assistance to you,
coupled with the fact that there is a good deal of skin missing from
the palm of his hand. The other man—”

“Ah! the other man—?” asked Athelney Jones, in a sneering voice, but
impressed none the less, as I could easily see, by the precision of the
other’s manner.

“Is a rather curious person,” said Sherlock Holmes, turning upon his
heel. “I hope before very long to be able to introduce you to the pair
of them.—A word with you, Watson.”

He led me out to the head of the stair. “This unexpected occurrence,”
he said, “has caused us rather to lose sight of the original purpose of
our journey.”

“I have just been thinking so,” I answered. “It is not right that Miss
Morstan should remain in this stricken house.”

“No. You must escort her home. She lives with Mrs. Cecil Forrester, in
Lower Camberwell: so it is not very far. I will wait for you here if
you will drive out again. Or perhaps you are too tired?”

“By no means. I don’t think I could rest until I know more of this
fantastic business. I have seen something of the rough side of life,
but I give you my word that this quick succession of strange surprises
to-night has shaken my nerve completely. I should like, however, to see
the matter through with you, now that I have got so far.”

“Your presence will be of great service to me,” he answered. “We shall
work the case out independently, and leave this fellow Jones to exult
over any mare’s-nest which he may choose to construct. When you have
dropped Miss Morstan I wish you to go on to No. 3, Pinchin Lane, down
near the water’s edge at Lambeth. The third house on the right-hand
side is a bird-stuffer’s: Sherman is the name. You will see a weasel
holding a young rabbit in the window. Knock old Sherman up, and tell
him, with my compliments, that I want Toby at once. You will bring Toby
back in the cab with you.”

“A dog, I suppose.”

“Yes,—a queer mongrel, with a most amazing power of scent. I would
rather have Toby’s help than that of the whole detective force of
London.”

“I shall bring him, then,” said I. “It is one now. I ought to be back
before three, if I can get a fresh horse.”

“And I,” said Holmes, “shall see what I can learn from Mrs. Bernstone,
and from the Indian servant, who, Mr. Thaddeus tell me, sleeps in the
next garret. Then I shall study the great Jones’s methods and listen to
his not too delicate sarcasms. ‘_Wir sind gewohnt das die Menschen
verhöhnen was sie nicht verstehen._’ Goethe is always pithy.”




Chapter VII
The Episode of the Barrel


The police had brought a cab with them, and in this I escorted Miss
Morstan back to her home. After the angelic fashion of women, she had
borne trouble with a calm face as long as there was some one weaker
than herself to support, and I had found her bright and placid by the
side of the frightened housekeeper. In the cab, however, she first
turned faint, and then burst into a passion of weeping,—so sorely had
she been tried by the adventures of the night. She has told me since
that she thought me cold and distant upon that journey. She little
guessed the struggle within my breast, or the effort of self-restraint
which held me back. My sympathies and my love went out to her, even as
my hand had in the garden. I felt that years of the conventionalities
of life could not teach me to know her sweet, brave nature as had this
one day of strange experiences. Yet there were two thoughts which
sealed the words of affection upon my lips. She was weak and helpless,
shaken in mind and nerve. It was to take her at a disadvantage to
obtrude love upon her at such a time. Worse still, she was rich. If
Holmes’s researches were successful, she would be an heiress. Was it
fair, was it honourable, that a half-pay surgeon should take such
advantage of an intimacy which chance had brought about? Might she not
look upon me as a mere vulgar fortune-seeker? I could not bear to risk
that such a thought should cross her mind. This Agra treasure
intervened like an impassable barrier between us.

It was nearly two o’clock when we reached Mrs. Cecil Forrester’s. The
servants had retired hours ago, but Mrs. Forrester had been so
interested by the strange message which Miss Morstan had received that
she had sat up in the hope of her return. She opened the door herself,
a middle-aged, graceful woman, and it gave me joy to see how tenderly
her arm stole round the other’s waist and how motherly was the voice in
which she greeted her. She was clearly no mere paid dependant, but an
honoured friend. I was introduced, and Mrs. Forrester earnestly begged
me to step in and tell her our adventures. I explained, however, the
importance of my errand, and promised faithfully to call and report any
progress which we might make with the case. As we drove away I stole a
glance back, and I still seem to see that little group on the step, the
two graceful, clinging figures, the half-opened door, the hall-light
shining through stained glass, the barometer, and the bright
stair-rods. It was soothing to catch even that passing glimpse of a
tranquil English home in the midst of the wild, dark business which had
absorbed us.

And the more I thought of what had happened, the wilder and darker it
grew. I reviewed the whole extraordinary sequence of events as I
rattled on through the silent gas-lit streets. There was the original
problem: that at least was pretty clear now. The death of Captain
Morstan, the sending of the pearls, the advertisement, the letter,—we
had had light upon all those events. They had only led us, however, to
a deeper and far more tragic mystery. The Indian treasure, the curious
plan found among Morstan’s baggage, the strange scene at Major Sholto’s
death, the rediscovery of the treasure immediately followed by the
murder of the discoverer, the very singular accompaniments to the
crime, the footsteps, the remarkable weapons, the words upon the card,
corresponding with those upon Captain Morstan’s chart,—here was indeed
a labyrinth in which a man less singularly endowed than my
fellow-lodger might well despair of ever finding the clue.

Pinchin Lane was a row of shabby two-storied brick houses in the lower
quarter of Lambeth. I had to knock for some time at No. 3 before I
could make my impression. At last, however, there was the glint of a
candle behind the blind, and a face looked out at the upper window.

“Go on, you drunken vagabone,” said the face. “If you kick up any more
row I’ll open the kennels and let out forty-three dogs upon you.”

“If you’ll let one out it’s just what I have come for,” said I.

“Go on!” yelled the voice. “So help me gracious, I have a wiper in the
bag, an’ I’ll drop it on your ’ead if you don’t hook it.”

“But I want a dog,” I cried.

“I won’t be argued with!” shouted Mr. Sherman. “Now stand clear, for
when I say ‘three,’ down goes the wiper.”

“Mr. Sherlock Holmes—” I began, but the words had a most magical
effect, for the window instantly slammed down, and within a minute the
door was unbarred and open. Mr. Sherman was a lanky, lean old man, with
stooping shoulders, a stringy neck, and blue-tinted glasses.

“A friend of Mr. Sherlock is always welcome,” said he. “Step in, sir.
Keep clear of the badger; for he bites. Ah, naughty, naughty, would you
take a nip at the gentleman?” This to a stoat which thrust its wicked
head and red eyes between the bars of its cage. “Don’t mind that, sir:
it’s only a slow-worm. It hain’t got no fangs, so I gives it the run o’
the room, for it keeps the beetles down. You must not mind my bein’
just a little short wi’ you at first, for I’m guyed at by the children,
and there’s many a one just comes down this lane to knock me up. What
was it that Mr. Sherlock Holmes wanted, sir?”

“He wanted a dog of yours.”

“Ah! that would be Toby.”

“Yes, Toby was the name.”

“Toby lives at No. 7 on the left here.” He moved slowly forward with
his candle among the queer animal family which he had gathered round
him. In the uncertain, shadowy light I could see dimly that there were
glancing, glimmering eyes peeping down at us from every cranny and
corner. Even the rafters above our heads were lined by solemn fowls,
who lazily shifted their weight from one leg to the other as our voices
disturbed their slumbers.

Toby proved to be an ugly, long-haired, lop-eared creature, half
spaniel and half lurcher, brown-and-white in colour, with a very clumsy
waddling gait. It accepted after some hesitation a lump of sugar which
the old naturalist handed to me, and, having thus sealed an alliance,
it followed me to the cab, and made no difficulties about accompanying
me. It had just struck three on the Palace clock when I found myself
back once more at Pondicherry Lodge. The ex-prize-fighter McMurdo had,
I found, been arrested as an accessory, and both he and Mr. Sholto had
been marched off to the station. Two constables guarded the narrow
gate, but they allowed me to pass with the dog on my mentioning the
detective’s name.

Holmes was standing on the door-step, with his hands in his pockets,
smoking his pipe.

“Ah, you have him there!” said he. “Good dog, then! Atheney Jones has
gone. We have had an immense display of energy since you left. He has
arrested not only friend Thaddeus, but the gatekeeper, the housekeeper,
and the Indian servant. We have the place to ourselves, but for a
sergeant upstairs. Leave the dog here, and come up.”

We tied Toby to the hall table, and re-ascended the stairs. The room
was as he had left it, save that a sheet had been draped over the
central figure. A weary-looking police-sergeant reclined in the corner.

“Lend me your bull’s-eye, sergeant,” said my companion. “Now tie this
bit of card round my neck, so as to hang it in front of me. Thank you.
Now I must kick off my boots and stockings.—Just you carry them down
with you, Watson. I am going to do a little climbing. And dip my
handkerchief into the creasote. That will do. Now come up into the
garret with me for a moment.”

We clambered up through the hole. Holmes turned his light once more
upon the footsteps in the dust.

“I wish you particularly to notice these footmarks,” he said. “Do you
observe anything noteworthy about them?”

“They belong,” I said, “to a child or a small woman.”

“Apart from their size, though. Is there nothing else?”

“They appear to be much as other footmarks.”

“Not at all. Look here! This is the print of a right foot in the dust.
Now I make one with my naked foot beside it. What is the chief
difference?”

“Your toes are all cramped together. The other print has each toe
distinctly divided.”

“Quite so. That is the point. Bear that in mind. Now, would you kindly
step over to that flap-window and smell the edge of the wood-work? I
shall stay here, as I have this handkerchief in my hand.”

I did as he directed, and was instantly conscious of a strong tarry
smell.

“That is where he put his foot in getting out. If _you_ can trace him,
I should think that Toby will have no difficulty. Now run downstairs,
loose the dog, and look out for Blondin.”

By the time that I got out into the grounds Sherlock Holmes was on the
roof, and I could see him like an enormous glow-worm crawling very
slowly along the ridge. I lost sight of him behind a stack of chimneys,
but he presently reappeared, and then vanished once more upon the
opposite side. When I made my way round there I found him seated at one
of the corner eaves.

“That you, Watson?” he cried.

“Yes.”

“This is the place. What is that black thing down there?”

“A water-barrel.”

“Top on it?”

“Yes.”

“No sign of a ladder?”

“No.”

“Confound the fellow! It’s a most break-neck place. I ought to be able
to come down where he could climb up. The water-pipe feels pretty firm.
Here goes, anyhow.”

There was a scuffling of feet, and the lantern began to come steadily
down the side of the wall. Then with a light spring he came on to the
barrel, and from there to the earth.

“It was easy to follow him,” he said, drawing on his stockings and
boots. “Tiles were loosened the whole way along, and in his hurry he
had dropped this. It confirms my diagnosis, as you doctors express it.”

The object which he held up to me was a small pocket or pouch woven out
of coloured grasses and with a few tawdry beads strung round it. In
shape and size it was not unlike a cigarette-case. Inside were half a
dozen spines of dark wood, sharp at one end and rounded at the other,
like that which had struck Bartholomew Sholto.

“They are hellish things,” said he. “Look out that you don’t prick
yourself. I’m delighted to have them, for the chances are that they are
all he has. There is the less fear of you or me finding one in our skin
before long. I would sooner face a Martini bullet, myself. Are you game
for a six-mile trudge, Watson?”

“Certainly,” I answered.

“Your leg will stand it?”

“Oh, yes.”

“Here you are, doggy! Good old Toby! Smell it, Toby, smell it!” He
pushed the creasote handkerchief under the dog’s nose, while the
creature stood with its fluffy legs separated, and with a most comical
cock to its head, like a connoisseur sniffing the _bouquet_ of a famous
vintage. Holmes then threw the handkerchief to a distance, fastened a
stout cord to the mongrel’s collar, and led him to the foot of the
water-barrel. The creature instantly broke into a succession of high,
tremulous yelps, and, with his nose on the ground, and his tail in the
air, pattered off upon the trail at a pace which strained his leash and
kept us at the top of our speed.

The east had been gradually whitening, and we could now see some
distance in the cold grey light. The square, massive house, with its
black, empty windows and high, bare walls, towered up, sad and forlorn,
behind us. Our course led right across the grounds, in and out among
the trenches and pits with which they were scarred and intersected. The
whole place, with its scattered dirt-heaps and ill-grown shrubs, had a
blighted, ill-omened look which harmonized with the black tragedy which
hung over it.

On reaching the boundary wall Toby ran along, whining eagerly,
underneath its shadow, and stopped finally in a corner screened by a
young beech. Where the two walls joined, several bricks had been
loosened, and the crevices left were worn down and rounded upon the
lower side, as though they had frequently been used as a ladder. Holmes
clambered up, and, taking the dog from me, he dropped it over upon the
other side.

“There’s the print of wooden-leg’s hand,” he remarked, as I mounted up
beside him. “You see the slight smudge of blood upon the white plaster.
What a lucky thing it is that we have had no very heavy rain since
yesterday! The scent will lie upon the road in spite of their
eight-and-twenty hours’ start.”

I confess that I had my doubts myself when I reflected upon the great
traffic which had passed along the London road in the interval. My
fears were soon appeased, however. Toby never hesitated or swerved, but
waddled on in his peculiar rolling fashion. Clearly, the pungent smell
of the creasote rose high above all other contending scents.

“Do not imagine,” said Holmes, “that I depend for my success in this
case upon the mere chance of one of these fellows having put his foot
in the chemical. I have knowledge now which would enable me to trace
them in many different ways. This, however, is the readiest and, since
fortune has put it into our hands, I should be culpable if I neglected
it. It has, however, prevented the case from becoming the pretty little
intellectual problem which it at one time promised to be. There might
have been some credit to be gained out of it, but for this too palpable
clue.”

“There is credit, and to spare,” said I. “I assure you, Holmes, that I
marvel at the means by which you obtain your results in this case, even
more than I did in the Jefferson Hope Murder. The thing seems to me to
be deeper and more inexplicable. How, for example, could you describe
with such confidence the wooden-legged man?”

“Pshaw, my dear boy! it was simplicity itself. I don’t wish to be
theatrical. It is all patent and above-board. Two officers who are in
command of a convict-guard learn an important secret as to buried
treasure. A map is drawn for them by an Englishman named Jonathan
Small. You remember that we saw the name upon the chart in Captain
Morstan’s possession. He had signed it in behalf of himself and his
associates,—the sign of the four, as he somewhat dramatically called
it. Aided by this chart, the officers—or one of them—gets the treasure
and brings it to England, leaving, we will suppose, some condition
under which he received it unfulfilled. Now, then, why did not Jonathan
Small get the treasure himself? The answer is obvious. The chart is
dated at a time when Morstan was brought into close association with
convicts. Jonathan Small did not get the treasure because he and his
associates were themselves convicts and could not get away.”

“But that is mere speculation,” said I.

“It is more than that. It is the only hypothesis which covers the
facts. Let us see how it fits in with the sequel. Major Sholto remains
at peace for some years, happy in the possession of his treasure. Then
he receives a letter from India which gives him a great fright. What
was that?”

“A letter to say that the men whom he had wronged had been set free.”

“Or had escaped. That is much more likely, for he would have known what
their term of imprisonment was. It would not have been a surprise to
him. What does he do then? He guards himself against a wooden-legged
man,—a white man, mark you, for he mistakes a white tradesman for him,
and actually fires a pistol at him. Now, only one white man’s name is
on the chart. The others are Hindoos or Mohammedans. There is no other
white man. Therefore we may say with confidence that the wooden-legged
man is identical with Jonathan Small. Does the reasoning strike you as
being faulty?”

“No: it is clear and concise.”

“Well, now, let us put ourselves in the place of Jonathan Small. Let us
look at it from his point of view. He comes to England with the double
idea of regaining what he would consider to be his rights and of having
his revenge upon the man who had wronged him. He found out where Sholto
lived, and very possibly he established communications with some one
inside the house. There is this butler, Lal Rao, whom we have not seen.
Mrs. Bernstone gives him far from a good character. Small could not
find out, however, where the treasure was hid, for no one ever knew,
save the major and one faithful servant who had died. Suddenly Small
learns that the major is on his death-bed. In a frenzy lest the secret
of the treasure die with him, he runs the gauntlet of the guards, makes
his way to the dying man’s window, and is only deterred from entering
by the presence of his two sons. Mad with hate, however, against the
dead man, he enters the room that night, searches his private papers in
the hope of discovering some memorandum relating to the treasure, and
finally leaves a momento of his visit in the short inscription upon the
card. He had doubtless planned beforehand that should he slay the major
he would leave some such record upon the body as a sign that it was not
a common murder, but, from the point of view of the four associates,
something in the nature of an act of justice. Whimsical and bizarre
conceits of this kind are common enough in the annals of crime, and
usually afford valuable indications as to the criminal. Do you follow
all this?”

“Very clearly.”

“Now, what could Jonathan Small do? He could only continue to keep a
secret watch upon the efforts made to find the treasure. Possibly he
leaves England and only comes back at intervals. Then comes the
discovery of the garret, and he is instantly informed of it. We again
trace the presence of some confederate in the household. Jonathan, with
his wooden leg, is utterly unable to reach the lofty room of
Bartholomew Sholto. He takes with him, however, a rather curious
associate, who gets over this difficulty, but dips his naked foot into
creasote, whence comes Toby, and a six-mile limp for a half-pay officer
with a damaged tendo Achillis.”

“But it was the associate, and not Jonathan, who committed the crime.”

“Quite so. And rather to Jonathan’s disgust, to judge by the way he
stamped about when he got into the room. He bore no grudge against
Bartholomew Sholto, and would have preferred if he could have been
simply bound and gagged. He did not wish to put his head in a halter.
There was no help for it, however: the savage instincts of his
companion had broken out, and the poison had done its work: so Jonathan
Small left his record, lowered the treasure-box to the ground, and
followed it himself. That was the train of events as far as I can
decipher them. Of course as to his personal appearance he must be
middle-aged, and must be sunburned after serving his time in such an
oven as the Andamans. His height is readily calculated from the length
of his stride, and we know that he was bearded. His hairiness was the
one point which impressed itself upon Thaddeus Sholto when he saw him
at the window. I don’t know that there is anything else.”

“The associate?”

“Ah, well, there is no great mystery in that. But you will know all
about it soon enough. How sweet the morning air is! See how that one
little cloud floats like a pink feather from some gigantic flamingo.
Now the red rim of the sun pushes itself over the London cloud-bank. It
shines on a good many folk, but on none, I dare bet, who are on a
stranger errand than you and I. How small we feel with our petty
ambitions and strivings in the presence of the great elemental forces
of nature! Are you well up in your Jean Paul?”

“Fairly so. I worked back to him through Carlyle.”

“That was like following the brook to the parent lake. He makes one
curious but profound remark. It is that the chief proof of man’s real
greatness lies in his perception of his own smallness. It argues, you
see, a power of comparison and of appreciation which is in itself a
proof of nobility. There is much food for thought in Richter. You have
not a pistol, have you?”

“I have my stick.”

“It is just possible that we may need something of the sort if we get
to their lair. Jonathan I shall leave to you, but if the other turns
nasty I shall shoot him dead.” He took out his revolver as he spoke,
and, having loaded two of the chambers, he put it back into the
right-hand pocket of his jacket.

We had during this time been following the guidance of Toby down the
half-rural villa-lined roads which lead to the metropolis. Now,
however, we were beginning to come among continuous streets, where
labourers and dockmen were already astir, and slatternly women were
taking down shutters and brushing door-steps. At the square-topped
corner public houses business was just beginning, and rough-looking men
were emerging, rubbing their sleeves across their beards after their
morning wet. Strange dogs sauntered up and stared wonderingly at us as
we passed, but our inimitable Toby looked neither to the right nor to
the left, but trotted onwards with his nose to the ground and an
occasional eager whine which spoke of a hot scent.

We had traversed Streatham, Brixton, Camberwell, and now found
ourselves in Kennington Lane, having borne away through the
side-streets to the east of the Oval. The men whom we pursued seemed to
have taken a curiously zigzag road, with the idea probably of escaping
observation. They had never kept to the main road if a parallel
side-street would serve their turn. At the foot of Kennington Lane they
had edged away to the left through Bond Street and Miles Street. Where
the latter street turns into Knight’s Place, Toby ceased to advance,
but began to run backwards and forwards with one ear cocked and the
other drooping, the very picture of canine indecision. Then he waddled
round in circles, looking up to us from time to time, as if to ask for
sympathy in his embarrassment.

“What the deuce is the matter with the dog?” growled Holmes. “They
surely would not take a cab, or go off in a balloon.”

“Perhaps they stood here for some time,” I suggested.

“Ah! it’s all right. He’s off again,” said my companion, in a tone of
relief.

He was indeed off, for after sniffing round again he suddenly made up
his mind, and darted away with an energy and determination such as he
had not yet shown. The scent appeared to be much hotter than before,
for he had not even to put his nose on the ground, but tugged at his
leash and tried to break into a run. I could see by the gleam in
Holmes’s eyes that he thought we were nearing the end of our journey.

Our course now ran down Nine Elms until we came to Broderick and
Nelson’s large timber-yard, just past the White Eagle tavern. Here the
dog, frantic with excitement, turned down through the side-gate into
the enclosure, where the sawyers were already at work. On the dog raced
through sawdust and shavings, down an alley, round a passage, between
two wood-piles, and finally, with a triumphant yelp, sprang upon a
large barrel which still stood upon the hand-trolley on which it had
been brought. With lolling tongue and blinking eyes, Toby stood upon
the cask, looking from one to the other of us for some sign of
appreciation. The staves of the barrel and the wheels of the trolley
were smeared with a dark liquid, and the whole air was heavy with the
smell of creasote.

Sherlock Holmes and I looked blankly at each other, and then burst
simultaneously into an uncontrollable fit of laughter.




Chapter VIII
The Baker Street Irregulars


“What now?” I asked. “Toby has lost his character for infallibility.”

“He acted according to his lights,” said Holmes, lifting him down from
the barrel and walking him out of the timber-yard. “If you consider how
much creasote is carted about London in one day, it is no great wonder
that our trail should have been crossed. It is much used now,
especially for the seasoning of wood. Poor Toby is not to blame.”

“We must get on the main scent again, I suppose.”

“Yes. And, fortunately, we have no distance to go. Evidently what
puzzled the dog at the corner of Knight’s Place was that there were two
different trails running in opposite directions. We took the wrong one.
It only remains to follow the other.”

There was no difficulty about this. On leading Toby to the place where
he had committed his fault, he cast about in a wide circle and finally
dashed off in a fresh direction.

“We must take care that he does not now bring us to the place where the
creasote-barrel came from,” I observed.

“I had thought of that. But you notice that he keeps on the pavement,
whereas the barrel passed down the roadway. No, we are on the true
scent now.”

It tended down towards the river-side, running through Belmont Place
and Prince’s Street. At the end of Broad Street it ran right down to
the water’s edge, where there was a small wooden wharf. Toby led us to
the very edge of this, and there stood whining, looking out on the dark
current beyond.

“We are out of luck,” said Holmes. “They have taken to a boat here.”
Several small punts and skiffs were lying about in the water and on the
edge of the wharf. We took Toby round to each in turn, but, though he
sniffed earnestly, he made no sign.

Close to the rude landing-stage was a small brick house, with a wooden
placard slung out through the second window. “Mordecai Smith” was
printed across it in large letters, and, underneath, “Boats to hire by
the hour or day.” A second inscription above the door informed us that
a steam launch was kept,—a statement which was confirmed by a great
pile of coke upon the jetty. Sherlock Holmes looked slowly round, and
his face assumed an ominous expression.

“This looks bad,” said he. “These fellows are sharper than I expected.
They seem to have covered their tracks. There has, I fear, been
preconcerted management here.”

He was approaching the door of the house, when it opened, and a little,
curly-headed lad of six came running out, followed by a stoutish,
red-faced woman with a large sponge in her hand.

“You come back and be washed, Jack,” she shouted. “Come back, you young
imp; for if your father comes home and finds you like that, he’ll let
us hear of it.”

“Dear little chap!” said Holmes, strategically. “What a rosy-cheeked
young rascal! Now, Jack, is there anything you would like?”

The youth pondered for a moment. “I’d like a shillin’,” said he.

“Nothing you would like better?”

“I’d like two shillin’ better,” the prodigy answered, after some
thought.

“Here you are, then! Catch!—A fine child, Mrs. Smith!”

“Lor’ bless you, sir, he is that, and forward. He gets a’most too much
for me to manage, ’specially when my man is away days at a time.”

“Away, is he?” said Holmes, in a disappointed voice. “I am sorry for
that, for I wanted to speak to Mr. Smith.”

“He’s been away since yesterday mornin’, sir, and, truth to tell, I am
beginnin’ to feel frightened about him. But if it was about a boat,
sir, maybe I could serve as well.”

“I wanted to hire his steam launch.”

“Why, bless you, sir, it is in the steam launch that he has gone.
That’s what puzzles me; for I know there ain’t more coals in her than
would take her to about Woolwich and back. If he’d been away in the
barge I’d ha’ thought nothin’; for many a time a job has taken him as
far as Gravesend, and then if there was much doin’ there he might ha’
stayed over. But what good is a steam launch without coals?”

“He might have bought some at a wharf down the river.”

“He might, sir, but it weren’t his way. Many a time I’ve heard him call
out at the prices they charge for a few odd bags. Besides, I don’t like
that wooden-legged man, wi’ his ugly face and outlandish talk. What did
he want always knockin’ about here for?”

“A wooden-legged man?” said Holmes, with bland surprise.

“Yes, sir, a brown, monkey-faced chap that’s called more’n once for my
old man. It was him that roused him up yesternight, and, what’s more,
my man knew he was comin’, for he had steam up in the launch. I tell
you straight, sir, I don’t feel easy in my mind about it.”

“But, my dear Mrs. Smith,” said Holmes, shrugging his shoulders, “You
are frightening yourself about nothing. How could you possibly tell
that it was the wooden-legged man who came in the night? I don’t quite
understand how you can be so sure.”

“His voice, sir. I knew his voice, which is kind o’ thick and foggy. He
tapped at the winder,—about three it would be. ‘Show a leg, matey,’
says he: ‘time to turn out guard.’ My old man woke up Jim,—that’s my
eldest,—and away they went, without so much as a word to me. I could
hear the wooden leg clackin’ on the stones.”

“And was this wooden-legged man alone?”

“Couldn’t say, I am sure, sir. I didn’t hear no one else.”

“I am sorry, Mrs. Smith, for I wanted a steam launch, and I have heard
good reports of the—Let me see, what is her name?”

“The _Aurora_, sir.”

“Ah! She’s not that old green launch with a yellow line, very broad in
the beam?”

“No, indeed. She’s as trim a little thing as any on the river. She’s
been fresh painted, black with two red streaks.”

“Thanks. I hope that you will hear soon from Mr. Smith. I am going down
the river; and if I should see anything of the _Aurora_ I shall let him
know that you are uneasy. A black funnel, you say?”

“No, sir. Black with a white band.”

“Ah, of course. It was the sides which were black. Good-morning, Mrs.
Smith.—There is a boatman here with a wherry, Watson. We shall take it
and cross the river.

“The main thing with people of that sort,” said Holmes, as we sat in
the sheets of the wherry, “is never to let them think that their
information can be of the slightest importance to you. If you do, they
will instantly shut up like an oyster. If you listen to them under
protest, as it were, you are very likely to get what you want.”

“Our course now seems pretty clear,” said I.

“What would you do, then?”

“I would engage a launch and go down the river on the track of the
_Aurora_.”

“My dear fellow, it would be a colossal task. She may have touched at
any wharf on either side of the stream between here and Greenwich.
Below the bridge there is a perfect labyrinth of landing-places for
miles. It would take you days and days to exhaust them, if you set
about it alone.”

“Employ the police, then.”

“No. I shall probably call Athelney Jones in at the last moment. He is
not a bad fellow, and I should not like to do anything which would
injure him professionally. But I have a fancy for working it out
myself, now that we have gone so far.”

“Could we advertise, then, asking for information from wharfingers?”

“Worse and worse! Our men would know that the chase was hot at their
heels, and they would be off out of the country. As it is, they are
likely enough to leave, but as long as they think they are perfectly
safe they will be in no hurry. Jones’s energy will be of use to us
there, for his view of the case is sure to push itself into the daily
press, and the runaways will think that every one is off on the wrong
scent.”

“What are we to do, then?” I asked, as we landed near Millbank
Penitentiary.

“Take this hansom, drive home, have some breakfast, and get an hour’s
sleep. It is quite on the cards that we may be afoot to-night again.
Stop at a telegraph-office, cabby! We will keep Toby, for he may be of
use to us yet.”

We pulled up at the Great Peter Street post-office, and Holmes
despatched his wire. “Whom do you think that is to?” he asked, as we
resumed our journey.

“I am sure I don’t know.”

“You remember the Baker Street division of the detective police force
whom I employed in the Jefferson Hope case?”

“Well,” said I, laughing.

“This is just the case where they might be invaluable. If they fail, I
have other resources; but I shall try them first. That wire was to my
dirty little lieutenant, Wiggins, and I expect that he and his gang
will be with us before we have finished our breakfast.”

It was between eight and nine o’clock now, and I was conscious of a
strong reaction after the successive excitements of the night. I was
limp and weary, befogged in mind and fatigued in body. I had not the
professional enthusiasm which carried my companion on, nor could I look
at the matter as a mere abstract intellectual problem. As far as the
death of Bartholomew Sholto went, I had heard little good of him, and
could feel no intense antipathy to his murderers. The treasure,
however, was a different matter. That, or part of it, belonged
rightfully to Miss Morstan. While there was a chance of recovering it I
was ready to devote my life to the one object. True, if I found it it
would probably put her forever beyond my reach. Yet it would be a petty
and selfish love which would be influenced by such a thought as that.
If Holmes could work to find the criminals, I had a tenfold stronger
reason to urge me on to find the treasure.

A bath at Baker Street and a complete change freshened me up
wonderfully. When I came down to our room I found the breakfast laid
and Homes pouring out the coffee.

“Here it is,” said he, laughing, and pointing to an open newspaper.
“The energetic Jones and the ubiquitous reporter have fixed it up
between them. But you have had enough of the case. Better have your ham
and eggs first.”

I took the paper from him and read the short notice, which was headed
“Mysterious Business at Upper Norwood.”

“About twelve o’clock last night,” said the _Standard_, “Mr.
Bartholomew Sholto, of Pondicherry Lodge, Upper Norwood, was found dead
in his room under circumstances which point to foul play. As far as we
can learn, no actual traces of violence were found upon Mr. Sholto’s
person, but a valuable collection of Indian gems which the deceased
gentleman had inherited from his father has been carried off. The
discovery was first made by Mr. Sherlock Holmes and Dr. Watson, who had
called at the house with Mr. Thaddeus Sholto, brother of the deceased.
By a singular piece of good fortune, Mr. Athelney Jones, the well-known
member of the detective police force, happened to be at the Norwood
Police Station, and was on the ground within half an hour of the first
alarm. His trained and experienced faculties were at once directed
towards the detection of the criminals, with the gratifying result that
the brother, Thaddeus Sholto, has already been arrested, together with
the housekeeper, Mrs. Bernstone, an Indian butler named Lal Rao, and a
porter, or gatekeeper, named McMurdo. It is quite certain that the
thief or thieves were well acquainted with the house, for Mr. Jones’s
well-known technical knowledge and his powers of minute observation
have enabled him to prove conclusively that the miscreants could not
have entered by the door or by the window, but must have made their way
across the roof of the building, and so through a trap-door into a room
which communicated with that in which the body was found. This fact,
which has been very clearly made out, proves conclusively that it was
no mere haphazard burglary. The prompt and energetic action of the
officers of the law shows the great advantage of the presence on such
occasions of a single vigorous and masterful mind. We cannot but think
that it supplies an argument to those who would wish to see our
detectives more decentralised, and so brought into closer and more
effective touch with the cases which it is their duty to investigate.”

“Isn’t it gorgeous!” said Holmes, grinning over his coffee-cup. “What
do you think of it?”

“I think that we have had a close shave ourselves of being arrested for
the crime.”

“So do I. I wouldn’t answer for our safety now, if he should happen to
have another of his attacks of energy.”

At this moment there was a loud ring at the bell, and I could hear Mrs.
Hudson, our landlady, raising her voice in a wail of expostulation and
dismay.

“By heaven, Holmes,” I said, half rising, “I believe that they are
really after us.”

“No, it’s not quite so bad as that. It is the unofficial force,—the
Baker Street irregulars.”

As he spoke, there came a swift pattering of naked feet upon the
stairs, a clatter of high voices, and in rushed a dozen dirty and
ragged little street-Arabs. There was some show of discipline among
them, despite their tumultuous entry, for they instantly drew up in
line and stood facing us with expectant faces. One of their number,
taller and older than the others, stood forward with an air of lounging
superiority which was very funny in such a disreputable little
scarecrow.

“Got your message, sir,” said he, “and brought ’em on sharp. Three bob
and a tanner for tickets.”

“Here you are,” said Holmes, producing some silver. “In future they can
report to you, Wiggins, and you to me. I cannot have the house invaded
in this way. However, it is just as well that you should all hear the
instructions. I want to find the whereabouts of a steam launch called
the _Aurora_, owner Mordecai Smith, black with two red streaks, funnel
black with a white band. She is down the river somewhere. I want one
boy to be at Mordecai Smith’s landing-stage opposite Millbank to say if
the boat comes back. You must divide it out among yourselves, and do
both banks thoroughly. Let me know the moment you have news. Is that
all clear?”

“Yes, guv’nor,” said Wiggins.

“The old scale of pay, and a guinea to the boy who finds the boat.
Here’s a day in advance. Now off you go!” He handed them a shilling
each, and away they buzzed down the stairs, and I saw them a moment
later streaming down the street.

“If the launch is above water they will find her,” said Holmes, as he
rose from the table and lit his pipe. “They can go everywhere, see
everything, overhear every one. I expect to hear before evening that
they have spotted her. In the meanwhile, we can do nothing but await
results. We cannot pick up the broken trail until we find either the
_Aurora_ or Mr. Mordecai Smith.”

“Toby could eat these scraps, I dare say. Are you going to bed,
Holmes?”

“No; I am not tired. I have a curious constitution. I never remember
feeling tired by work, though idleness exhausts me completely. I am
going to smoke and to think over this queer business to which my fair
client has introduced us. If ever man had an easy task, this of ours
ought to be. Wooden-legged men are not so common, but the other man
must, I should think, be absolutely unique.”

“That other man again!”

“I have no wish to make a mystery of him,—to you, anyway. But you must
have formed your own opinion. Now, do consider the data. Diminutive
footmarks, toes never fettered by boots, naked feet, stone-headed
wooden mace, great agility, small poisoned darts. What do you make of
all this?”

“A savage!” I exclaimed. “Perhaps one of those Indians who were the
associates of Jonathan Small.”

“Hardly that,” said he. “When first I saw signs of strange weapons I
was inclined to think so; but the remarkable character of the footmarks
caused me to reconsider my views. Some of the inhabitants of the Indian
Peninsula are small men, but none could have left such marks as that.
The Hindoo proper has long and thin feet. The sandal-wearing Mohammedan
has the great toe well separated from the others, because the thong is
commonly passed between. These little darts, too, could only be shot in
one way. They are from a blow-pipe. Now, then, where are we to find our
savage?”

“South American,” I hazarded.

He stretched his hand up, and took down a bulky volume from the shelf.
“This is the first volume of a gazetteer which is now being published.
It may be looked upon as the very latest authority. What have we here?
‘Andaman Islands, situated 340 miles to the north of Sumatra, in the
Bay of Bengal.’ Hum! hum! What’s all this? Moist climate, coral reefs,
sharks, Port Blair, convict-barracks, Rutland Island, cottonwoods—Ah,
here we are. ‘The aborigines of the Andaman Islands may perhaps claim
the distinction of being the smallest race upon this earth, though some
anthropologists prefer the Bushmen of Africa, the Digger Indians of
America, and the Terra del Fuegians. The average height is rather below
four feet, although many full-grown adults may be found who are very
much smaller than this. They are a fierce, morose, and intractable
people, though capable of forming most devoted friendships when their
confidence has once been gained.’ Mark that, Watson. Now, then, listen
to this. ‘They are naturally hideous, having large, misshapen heads,
small, fierce eyes, and distorted features. Their feet and hands,
however, are remarkably small. So intractable and fierce are they that
all the efforts of the British official have failed to win them over in
any degree. They have always been a terror to shipwrecked crews,
braining the survivors with their stone-headed clubs, or shooting them
with their poisoned arrows. These massacres are invariably concluded by
a cannibal feast.’ Nice, amiable people, Watson! If this fellow had
been left to his own unaided devices this affair might have taken an
even more ghastly turn. I fancy that, even as it is, Jonathan Small
would give a good deal not to have employed him.”

“But how came he to have so singular a companion?”

“Ah, that is more than I can tell. Since, however, we had already
determined that Small had come from the Andamans, it is not so very
wonderful that this islander should be with him. No doubt we shall know
all about it in time. Look here, Watson; you look regularly done. Lie
down there on the sofa, and see if I can put you to sleep.”

He took up his violin from the corner, and as I stretched myself out he
began to play some low, dreamy, melodious air,—his own, no doubt, for
he had a remarkable gift for improvisation. I have a vague remembrance
of his gaunt limbs, his earnest face, and the rise and fall of his bow.
Then I seemed to be floated peacefully away upon a soft sea of sound,
until I found myself in dreamland, with the sweet face of Mary Morstan
looking down upon me.




Chapter IX
A Break in the Chain


It was late in the afternoon before I woke, strengthened and refreshed.
Sherlock Holmes still sat exactly as I had left him, save that he had
laid aside his violin and was deep in a book. He looked across at me,
as I stirred, and I noticed that his face was dark and troubled.

“You have slept soundly,” he said. “I feared that our talk would wake
you.”

“I heard nothing,” I answered. “Have you had fresh news, then?”

“Unfortunately, no. I confess that I am surprised and disappointed. I
expected something definite by this time. Wiggins has just been up to
report. He says that no trace can be found of the launch. It is a
provoking check, for every hour is of importance.”

“Can I do anything? I am perfectly fresh now, and quite ready for
another night’s outing.”

“No, we can do nothing. We can only wait. If we go ourselves, the
message might come in our absence, and delay be caused. You can do what
you will, but I must remain on guard.”

“Then I shall run over to Camberwell and call upon Mrs. Cecil
Forrester. She asked me to, yesterday.”

“On Mrs. Cecil Forrester?” asked Holmes, with the twinkle of a smile in
his eyes.

“Well, of course Miss Morstan too. They were anxious to hear what
happened.”

“I would not tell them too much,” said Holmes. “Women are never to be
entirely trusted,—not the best of them.”

I did not pause to argue over this atrocious sentiment. “I shall be
back in an hour or two,” I remarked.

“All right! Good luck! But, I say, if you are crossing the river you
may as well return Toby, for I don’t think it is at all likely that we
shall have any use for him now.”

I took our mongrel accordingly, and left him, together with a
half-sovereign, at the old naturalist’s in Pinchin Lane. At Camberwell
I found Miss Morstan a little weary after her night’s adventures, but
very eager to hear the news. Mrs. Forrester, too, was full of
curiosity. I told them all that we had done, suppressing, however, the
more dreadful parts of the tragedy. Thus, although I spoke of Mr.
Sholto’s death, I said nothing of the exact manner and method of it.
With all my omissions, however, there was enough to startle and amaze
them.

“It is a romance!” cried Mrs. Forrester. “An injured lady, half a
million in treasure, a black cannibal, and a wooden-legged ruffian.
They take the place of the conventional dragon or wicked earl.”

“And two knight-errants to the rescue,” added Miss Morstan, with a
bright glance at me.

“Why, Mary, your fortune depends upon the issue of this search. I don’t
think that you are nearly excited enough. Just imagine what it must be
to be so rich, and to have the world at your feet!”

It sent a little thrill of joy to my heart to notice that she showed no
sign of elation at the prospect. On the contrary, she gave a toss of
her proud head, as though the matter were one in which she took small
interest.

“It is for Mr. Thaddeus Sholto that I am anxious,” she said. “Nothing
else is of any consequence; but I think that he has behaved most kindly
and honourably throughout. It is our duty to clear him of this dreadful
and unfounded charge.”

It was evening before I left Camberwell, and quite dark by the time I
reached home. My companion’s book and pipe lay by his chair, but he had
disappeared. I looked about in the hope of seeing a note, but there was
none.

“I suppose that Mr. Sherlock Holmes has gone out,” I said to Mrs.
Hudson as she came up to lower the blinds.

“No, sir. He has gone to his room, sir. Do you know, sir,” sinking her
voice into an impressive whisper, “I am afraid for his health?”

“Why so, Mrs. Hudson?”

“Well, he’s that strange, sir. After you was gone he walked and he
walked, up and down, and up and down, until I was weary of the sound of
his footstep. Then I heard him talking to himself and muttering, and
every time the bell rang out he came on the stairhead, with ‘What is
that, Mrs. Hudson?’ And now he has slammed off to his room, but I can
hear him walking away the same as ever. I hope he’s not going to be
ill, sir. I ventured to say something to him about cooling medicine,
but he turned on me, sir, with such a look that I don’t know how ever I
got out of the room.”

“I don’t think that you have any cause to be uneasy, Mrs. Hudson,” I
answered. “I have seen him like this before. He has some small matter
upon his mind which makes him restless.” I tried to speak lightly to
our worthy landlady, but I was myself somewhat uneasy when through the
long night I still from time to time heard the dull sound of his tread,
and knew how his keen spirit was chafing against this involuntary
inaction.

At breakfast-time he looked worn and haggard, with a little fleck of
feverish colour upon either cheek.

“You are knocking yourself up, old man,” I remarked. “I heard you
marching about in the night.”

“No, I could not sleep,” he answered. “This infernal problem is
consuming me. It is too much to be balked by so petty an obstacle, when
all else had been overcome. I know the men, the launch, everything; and
yet I can get no news. I have set other agencies at work, and used
every means at my disposal. The whole river has been searched on either
side, but there is no news, nor has Mrs. Smith heard of her husband. I
shall come to the conclusion soon that they have scuttled the craft.
But there are objections to that.”

“Or that Mrs. Smith has put us on a wrong scent.”

“No, I think that may be dismissed. I had inquiries made, and there is
a launch of that description.”

“Could it have gone up the river?”

“I have considered that possibility too, and there is a search-party
who will work up as far as Richmond. If no news comes to-day, I shall
start off myself to-morrow, and go for the men rather than the boat.
But surely, surely, we shall hear something.”

We did not, however. Not a word came to us either from Wiggins or from
the other agencies. There were articles in most of the papers upon the
Norwood tragedy. They all appeared to be rather hostile to the
unfortunate Thaddeus Sholto. No fresh details were to be found,
however, in any of them, save that an inquest was to be held upon the
following day. I walked over to Camberwell in the evening to report our
ill success to the ladies, and on my return I found Holmes dejected and
somewhat morose. He would hardly reply to my questions, and busied
himself all evening in an abstruse chemical analysis which involved
much heating of retorts and distilling of vapours, ending at last in a
smell which fairly drove me out of the apartment. Up to the small hours
of the morning I could hear the clinking of his test-tubes which told
me that he was still engaged in his malodorous experiment.

In the early dawn I woke with a start, and was surprised to find him
standing by my bedside, clad in a rude sailor dress with a pea-jacket,
and a coarse red scarf round his neck.

“I am off down the river, Watson,” said he. “I have been turning it
over in my mind, and I can see only one way out of it. It is worth
trying, at all events.”

“Surely I can come with you, then?” said I.

“No; you can be much more useful if you will remain here as my
representative. I am loath to go, for it is quite on the cards that
some message may come during the day, though Wiggins was despondent
about it last night. I want you to open all notes and telegrams, and to
act on your own judgment if any news should come. Can I rely upon you?”

“Most certainly.”

“I am afraid that you will not be able to wire to me, for I can hardly
tell yet where I may find myself. If I am in luck, however, I may not
be gone so very long. I shall have news of some sort or other before I
get back.”

I had heard nothing of him by breakfast-time. On opening the
_Standard_, however, I found that there was a fresh allusion to the
business. “With reference to the Upper Norwood tragedy,” it remarked,
“we have reason to believe that the matter promises to be even more
complex and mysterious than was originally supposed. Fresh evidence has
shown that it is quite impossible that Mr. Thaddeus Sholto could have
been in any way concerned in the matter. He and the housekeeper, Mrs.
Bernstone, were both released yesterday evening. It is believed,
however, that the police have a clue as to the real culprits, and that
it is being prosecuted by Mr. Athelney Jones, of Scotland Yard, with
all his well-known energy and sagacity. Further arrests may be expected
at any moment.”

“That is satisfactory so far as it goes,” thought I. “Friend Sholto is
safe, at any rate. I wonder what the fresh clue may be; though it seems
to be a stereotyped form whenever the police have made a blunder.”

I tossed the paper down upon the table, but at that moment my eye
caught an advertisement in the agony column. It ran in this way:

“Lost.—Whereas Mordecai Smith, boatman, and his son, Jim, left Smith’s
Wharf at or about three o’clock last Tuesday morning in the steam
launch _Aurora_, black with two red stripes, funnel black with a white
band, the sum of five pounds will be paid to any one who can give
information to Mrs. Smith, at Smith’s Wharf, or at 221_b_ Baker Street,
as to the whereabouts of the said Mordecai Smith and the launch
_Aurora_.”


This was clearly Holmes’s doing. The Baker Street address was enough to
prove that. It struck me as rather ingenious, because it might be read
by the fugitives without their seeing in it more than the natural
anxiety of a wife for her missing husband.

It was a long day. Every time that a knock came to the door, or a sharp
step passed in the street, I imagined that it was either Holmes
returning or an answer to his advertisement. I tried to read, but my
thoughts would wander off to our strange quest and to the ill-assorted
and villainous pair whom we were pursuing. Could there be, I wondered,
some radical flaw in my companion’s reasoning. Might he be suffering
from some huge self-deception? Was it not possible that his nimble and
speculative mind had built up this wild theory upon faulty premises? I
had never known him to be wrong; and yet the keenest reasoner may
occasionally be deceived. He was likely, I thought, to fall into error
through the over-refinement of his logic,—his preference for a subtle
and bizarre explanation when a plainer and more commonplace one lay
ready to his hand. Yet, on the other hand, I had myself seen the
evidence, and I had heard the reasons for his deductions. When I looked
back on the long chain of curious circumstances, many of them trivial
in themselves, but all tending in the same direction, I could not
disguise from myself that even if Holmes’s explanation were incorrect
the true theory must be equally _outré_ and startling.

At three o’clock in the afternoon there was a loud peal at the bell, an
authoritative voice in the hall, and, to my surprise, no less a person
than Mr. Athelney Jones was shown up to me. Very different was he,
however, from the brusque and masterful professor of common sense who
had taken over the case so confidently at Upper Norwood. His expression
was downcast, and his bearing meek and even apologetic.

“Good-day, sir; good-day,” said he. “Mr. Sherlock Holmes is out, I
understand.”

“Yes, and I cannot be sure when he will be back. But perhaps you would
care to wait. Take that chair and try one of these cigars.”

“Thank you; I don’t mind if I do,” said he, mopping his face with a red
bandanna handkerchief.

“And a whiskey-and-soda?”

“Well, half a glass. It is very hot for the time of year; and I have
had a good deal to worry and try me. You know my theory about this
Norwood case?”

“I remember that you expressed one.”

“Well, I have been obliged to reconsider it. I had my net drawn tightly
round Mr. Sholto, sir, when pop he went through a hole in the middle of
it. He was able to prove an alibi which could not be shaken. From the
time that he left his brother’s room he was never out of sight of some
one or other. So it could not be he who climbed over roofs and through
trap-doors. It’s a very dark case, and my professional credit is at
stake. I should be very glad of a little assistance.”

“We all need help sometimes,” said I.

“Your friend Mr. Sherlock Holmes is a wonderful man, sir,” said he, in
a husky and confidential voice. “He’s a man who is not to be beat. I
have known that young man go into a good many cases, but I never saw
the case yet that he could not throw a light upon. He is irregular in
his methods, and a little quick perhaps in jumping at theories, but, on
the whole, I think he would have made a most promising officer, and I
don’t care who knows it. I have had a wire from him this morning, by
which I understand that he has got some clue to this Sholto business.
Here is the message.”

He took the telegram out of his pocket, and handed it to me. It was
dated from Poplar at twelve o’clock. “Go to Baker Street at once,” it
said. “If I have not returned, wait for me. I am close on the track of
the Sholto gang. You can come with us to-night if you want to be in at
the finish.”

“This sounds well. He has evidently picked up the scent again,” said I.

“Ah, then he has been at fault too,” exclaimed Jones, with evident
satisfaction. “Even the best of us are thrown off sometimes. Of course
this may prove to be a false alarm; but it is my duty as an officer of
the law to allow no chance to slip. But there is some one at the door.
Perhaps this is he.”

A heavy step was heard ascending the stair, with a great wheezing and
rattling as from a man who was sorely put to it for breath. Once or
twice he stopped, as though the climb were too much for him, but at
last he made his way to our door and entered. His appearance
corresponded to the sounds which we had heard. He was an aged man, clad
in seafaring garb, with an old pea-jacket buttoned up to his throat.
His back was bowed, his knees were shaky, and his breathing was
painfully asthmatic. As he leaned upon a thick oaken cudgel his
shoulders heaved in the effort to draw the air into his lungs. He had a
coloured scarf round his chin, and I could see little of his face save
a pair of keen dark eyes, overhung by bushy white brows, and long grey
side-whiskers. Altogether he gave me the impression of a respectable
master mariner who had fallen into years and poverty.

“What is it, my man?” I asked.

He looked about him in the slow methodical fashion of old age.

“Is Mr. Sherlock Holmes here?” said he.

“No; but I am acting for him. You can tell me any message you have for
him.”

“It was to him himself I was to tell it,” said he.

“But I tell you that I am acting for him. Was it about Mordecai Smith’s
boat?”

“Yes. I knows well where it is. An’ I knows where the men he is after
are. An’ I knows where the treasure is. I knows all about it.”

“Then tell me, and I shall let him know.”

“It was to him I was to tell it,” he repeated, with the petulant
obstinacy of a very old man.

“Well, you must wait for him.”

“No, no; I ain’t goin’ to lose a whole day to please no one. If Mr.
Holmes ain’t here, then Mr. Holmes must find it all out for himself. I
don’t care about the look of either of you, and I won’t tell a word.”

He shuffled towards the door, but Athelney Jones got in front of him.

“Wait a bit, my friend,” said he. “You have important information, and
you must not walk off. We shall keep you, whether you like or not,
until our friend returns.”

The old man made a little run towards the door, but, as Athelney Jones
put his broad back up against it, he recognised the uselessness of
resistance.

“Pretty sort o’ treatment this!” he cried, stamping his stick. “I come
here to see a gentleman, and you two, who I never saw in my life, seize
me and treat me in this fashion!”

“You will be none the worse,” I said. “We shall recompense you for the
loss of your time. Sit over here on the sofa, and you will not have
long to wait.”

He came across sullenly enough, and seated himself with his face
resting on his hands. Jones and I resumed our cigars and our talk.
Suddenly, however, Holmes’s voice broke in upon us.

“I think that you might offer me a cigar too,” he said.

We both started in our chairs. There was Holmes sitting close to us
with an air of quiet amusement.

“Holmes!” I exclaimed. “You here! But where is the old man?”

“Here is the old man,” said he, holding out a heap of white hair. “Here
he is,—wig, whiskers, eyebrows, and all. I thought my disguise was
pretty good, but I hardly expected that it would stand that test.”

“Ah, You rogue!” cried Jones, highly delighted. “You would have made an
actor, and a rare one. You had the proper workhouse cough, and those
weak legs of yours are worth ten pounds a week. I thought I knew the
glint of your eye, though. You didn’t get away from us so easily, You
see.”

“I have been working in that get-up all day,” said he, lighting his
cigar. “You see, a good many of the criminal classes begin to know
me,—especially since our friend here took to publishing some of my
cases: so I can only go on the war-path under some simple disguise like
this. You got my wire?”

“Yes; that was what brought me here.”

“How has your case prospered?”

“It has all come to nothing. I have had to release two of my prisoners,
and there is no evidence against the other two.”

“Never mind. We shall give you two others in the place of them. But you
must put yourself under my orders. You are welcome to all the official
credit, but you must act on the line that I point out. Is that agreed?”

“Entirely, if you will help me to the men.”

“Well, then, in the first place I shall want a fast police-boat—a steam
launch—to be at the Westminster Stairs at seven o’clock.”

“That is easily managed. There is always one about there; but I can
step across the road and telephone to make sure.”

“Then I shall want two stanch men, in case of resistance.”

“There will be two or three in the boat. What else?”

“When we secure the men we shall get the treasure. I think that it
would be a pleasure to my friend here to take the box round to the
young lady to whom half of it rightfully belongs. Let her be the first
to open it.—Eh, Watson?”

“It would be a great pleasure to me.”

“Rather an irregular proceeding,” said Jones, shaking his head.
“However, the whole thing is irregular, and I suppose we must wink at
it. The treasure must afterwards be handed over to the authorities
until after the official investigation.”

“Certainly. That is easily managed. One other point. I should much like
to have a few details about this matter from the lips of Jonathan Small
himself. You know I like to work the detail of my cases out. There is
no objection to my having an unofficial interview with him, either here
in my rooms or elsewhere, as long as he is efficiently guarded?”

“Well, you are master of the situation. I have had no proof yet of the
existence of this Jonathan Small. However, if you can catch him I don’t
see how I can refuse you an interview with him.”

“That is understood, then?”

“Perfectly. Is there anything else?”

“Only that I insist upon your dining with us. It will be ready in half
an hour. I have oysters and a brace of grouse, with something a little
choice in white wines.—Watson, you have never yet recognised my merits
as a housekeeper.”




Chapter X
The End of the Islander


Our meal was a merry one. Holmes could talk exceedingly well when he
chose, and that night he did choose. He appeared to be in a state of
nervous exaltation. I have never known him so brilliant. He spoke on a
quick succession of subjects,—on miracle-plays, on mediæval pottery, on
Stradivarius violins, on the Buddhism of Ceylon, and on the war-ships
of the future,—handling each as though he had made a special study of
it. His bright humour marked the reaction from his black depression of
the preceding days. Athelney Jones proved to be a sociable soul in his
hours of relaxation, and faced his dinner with the air of a _bon
vivant_. For myself, I felt elated at the thought that we were nearing
the end of our task, and I caught something of Holmes’s gaiety. None of
us alluded during dinner to the cause which had brought us together.

When the cloth was cleared, Holmes glanced at his watch, and filled up
three glasses with port. “One bumper,” said he, “to the success of our
little expedition. And now it is high time we were off. Have you a
pistol, Watson?”

“I have my old service-revolver in my desk.”

“You had best take it, then. It is well to be prepared. I see that the
cab is at the door. I ordered it for half-past six.”

It was a little past seven before we reached the Westminster wharf, and
found our launch awaiting us. Holmes eyed it critically.

“Is there anything to mark it as a police-boat?”

“Yes,—that green lamp at the side.”

“Then take it off.”

The small change was made, we stepped on board, and the ropes were cast
off. Jones, Holmes, and I sat in the stern. There was one man at the
rudder, one to tend the engines, and two burly police-inspectors
forward.

“Where to?” asked Jones.

“To the Tower. Tell them to stop opposite Jacobson’s Yard.”

Our craft was evidently a very fast one. We shot past the long lines of
loaded barges as though they were stationary. Holmes smiled with
satisfaction as we overhauled a river steamer and left her behind us.

“We ought to be able to catch anything on the river,” he said.

“Well, hardly that. But there are not many launches to beat us.”

“We shall have to catch the _Aurora_, and she has a name for being a
clipper. I will tell you how the land lies, Watson. You recollect how
annoyed I was at being balked by so small a thing?”

“Yes.”

“Well, I gave my mind a thorough rest by plunging into a chemical
analysis. One of our greatest statesmen has said that a change of work
is the best rest. So it is. When I had succeeded in dissolving the
hydrocarbon which I was at work at, I came back to our problem of the
Sholtos, and thought the whole matter out again. My boys had been up
the river and down the river without result. The launch was not at any
landing-stage or wharf, nor had it returned. Yet it could hardly have
been scuttled to hide their traces,—though that always remained as a
possible hypothesis if all else failed. I knew this man Small had a
certain degree of low cunning, but I did not think him capable of
anything in the nature of delicate finesse. That is usually a product
of higher education. I then reflected that since he had certainly been
in London some time—as we had evidence that he maintained a continual
watch over Pondicherry Lodge—he could hardly leave at a moment’s
notice, but would need some little time, if it were only a day, to
arrange his affairs. That was the balance of probability, at any rate.”

“It seems to me to be a little weak,” said I. “It is more probable that
he had arranged his affairs before ever he set out upon his
expedition.”

“No, I hardly think so. This lair of his would be too valuable a
retreat in case of need for him to give it up until he was sure that he
could do without it. But a second consideration struck me. Jonathan
Small must have felt that the peculiar appearance of his companion,
however much he may have top-coated him, would give rise to gossip, and
possibly be associated with this Norwood tragedy. He was quite sharp
enough to see that. They had started from their head-quarters under
cover of darkness, and he would wish to get back before it was broad
light. Now, it was past three o’clock, according to Mrs. Smith, when
they got the boat. It would be quite bright, and people would be about
in an hour or so. Therefore, I argued, they did not go very far. They
paid Smith well to hold his tongue, reserved his launch for the final
escape, and hurried to their lodgings with the treasure-box. In a
couple of nights, when they had time to see what view the papers took,
and whether there was any suspicion, they would make their way under
cover of darkness to some ship at Gravesend or in the Downs, where no
doubt they had already arranged for passages to America or the
Colonies.”

“But the launch? They could not have taken that to their lodgings.”

“Quite so. I argued that the launch must be no great way off, in spite
of its invisibility. I then put myself in the place of Small, and
looked at it as a man of his capacity would. He would probably consider
that to send back the launch or to keep it at a wharf would make
pursuit easy if the police did happen to get on his track. How, then,
could he conceal the launch and yet have her at hand when wanted? I
wondered what I should do myself if I were in his shoes. I could only
think of one way of doing it. I might land the launch over to some
boat-builder or repairer, with directions to make a trifling change in
her. She would then be removed to his shed or yard, and so be
effectually concealed, while at the same time I could have her at a few
hours’ notice.”

“That seems simple enough.”

“It is just these very simple things which are extremely liable to be
overlooked. However, I determined to act on the idea. I started at once
in this harmless seaman’s rig and inquired at all the yards down the
river. I drew blank at fifteen, but at the sixteenth—Jacobson’s—I
learned that the _Aurora_ had been handed over to them two days ago by
a wooden-legged man, with some trivial directions as to her rudder.
‘There ain’t naught amiss with her rudder,’ said the foreman. ‘There
she lies, with the red streaks.’ At that moment who should come down
but Mordecai Smith, the missing owner? He was rather the worse for
liquor. I should not, of course, have known him, but he bellowed out
his name and the name of his launch. ‘I want her to-night at eight
o’clock,’ said he,—‘eight o’clock sharp, mind, for I have two gentlemen
who won’t be kept waiting.’ They had evidently paid him well, for he
was very flush of money, chucking shillings about to the men. I
followed him some distance, but he subsided into an ale-house: so I
went back to the yard, and, happening to pick up one of my boys on the
way, I stationed him as a sentry over the launch. He is to stand at
water’s edge and wave his handkerchief to us when they start. We shall
be lying off in the stream, and it will be a strange thing if we do not
take men, treasure, and all.”

“You have planned it all very neatly, whether they are the right men or
not,” said Jones; “but if the affair were in my hands I should have had
a body of police in Jacobson’s Yard, and arrested them when they came
down.”

“Which would have been never. This man Small is a pretty shrewd fellow.
He would send a scout on ahead, and if anything made him suspicious lie
snug for another week.”

“But you might have stuck to Mordecai Smith, and so been led to their
hiding-place,” said I.

“In that case I should have wasted my day. I think that it is a hundred
to one against Smith knowing where they live. As long as he has liquor
and good pay, why should he ask questions? They send him messages what
to do. No, I thought over every possible course, and this is the best.”

While this conversation had been proceeding, we had been shooting the
long series of bridges which span the Thames. As we passed the City the
last rays of the sun were gilding the cross upon the summit of St.
Paul’s. It was twilight before we reached the Tower.

“That is Jacobson’s Yard,” said Holmes, pointing to a bristle of masts
and rigging on the Surrey side. “Cruise gently up and down here under
cover of this string of lighters.” He took a pair of night-glasses from
his pocket and gazed some time at the shore. “I see my sentry at his
post,” he remarked, “but no sign of a handkerchief.”

“Suppose we go down-stream a short way and lie in wait for them,” said
Jones, eagerly. We were all eager by this time, even the policemen and
stokers, who had a very vague idea of what was going forward.

“We have no right to take anything for granted,” Holmes answered. “It
is certainly ten to one that they go down-stream, but we cannot be
certain. From this point we can see the entrance of the yard, and they
can hardly see us. It will be a clear night and plenty of light. We
must stay where we are. See how the folk swarm over yonder in the
gaslight.”

“They are coming from work in the yard.”

“Dirty-looking rascals, but I suppose every one has some little
immortal spark concealed about him. You would not think it, to look at
them. There is no _a priori_ probability about it. A strange enigma is
man!”

“Some one calls him a soul concealed in an animal,” I suggested.

“Winwood Reade is good upon the subject,” said Holmes. “He remarks
that, while the individual man is an insoluble puzzle, in the aggregate
he becomes a mathematical certainty. You can, for example, never
foretell what any one man will do, but you can say with precision what
an average number will be up to. Individuals vary, but percentages
remain constant. So says the statistician. But do I see a handkerchief?
Surely there is a white flutter over yonder.”

“Yes, it is your boy,” I cried. “I can see him plainly.”

“And there is the _Aurora_,” exclaimed Holmes, “and going like the
devil! Full speed ahead, engineer. Make after that launch with the
yellow light. By heaven, I shall never forgive myself if she proves to
have the heels of us!”

She had slipped unseen through the yard-entrance and passed behind two
or three small craft, so that she had fairly got her speed up before we
saw her. Now she was flying down the stream, near in to the shore,
going at a tremendous rate. Jones looked gravely at her and shook his
head.

“She is very fast,” he said. “I doubt if we shall catch her.”

“We _must_ catch her!” cried Holmes, between his teeth. “Heap it on,
stokers! Make her do all she can! If we burn the boat we must have
them!”

We were fairly after her now. The furnaces roared, and the powerful
engines whizzed and clanked, like a great metallic heart. Her sharp,
steep prow cut through the river-water and sent two rolling waves to
right and to left of us. With every throb of the engines we sprang and
quivered like a living thing. One great yellow lantern in our bows
threw a long, flickering funnel of light in front of us. Right ahead a
dark blur upon the water showed where the _Aurora_ lay, and the swirl
of white foam behind her spoke of the pace at which she was going. We
flashed past barges, steamers, merchant-vessels, in and out, behind
this one and round the other. Voices hailed us out of the darkness, but
still the _Aurora_ thundered on, and still we followed close upon her
track.

“Pile it on, men, pile it on!” cried Holmes, looking down into the
engine-room, while the fierce glow from below beat upon his eager,
aquiline face. “Get every pound of steam you can.”

“I think we gain a little,” said Jones, with his eyes on the _Aurora_.

“I am sure of it,” said I. “We shall be up with her in a very few
minutes.”

At that moment, however, as our evil fate would have it, a tug with
three barges in tow blundered in between us. It was only by putting our
helm hard down that we avoided a collision, and before we could round
them and recover our way the _Aurora_ had gained a good two hundred
yards. She was still, however, well in view, and the murky uncertain
twilight was setting into a clear starlit night. Our boilers were
strained to their utmost, and the frail shell vibrated and creaked with
the fierce energy which was driving us along. We had shot through the
Pool, past the West India Docks, down the long Deptford Reach, and up
again after rounding the Isle of Dogs. The dull blur in front of us
resolved itself now clearly enough into the dainty _Aurora_. Jones
turned our search-light upon her, so that we could plainly see the
figures upon her deck. One man sat by the stern, with something black
between his knees over which he stooped. Beside him lay a dark mass
which looked like a Newfoundland dog. The boy held the tiller, while
against the red glare of the furnace I could see old Smith, stripped to
the waist, and shovelling coals for dear life. They may have had some
doubt at first as to whether we were really pursuing them, but now as
we followed every winding and turning which they took there could no
longer be any question about it. At Greenwich we were about three
hundred paces behind them. At Blackwall we could not have been more
than two hundred and fifty. I have coursed many creatures in many
countries during my checkered career, but never did sport give me such
a wild thrill as this mad, flying man-hunt down the Thames. Steadily we
drew in upon them, yard by yard. In the silence of the night we could
hear the panting and clanking of their machinery. The man in the stern
still crouched upon the deck, and his arms were moving as though he
were busy, while every now and then he would look up and measure with a
glance the distance which still separated us. Nearer we came and
nearer. Jones yelled to them to stop. We were not more than four boat’s
lengths behind them, both boats flying at a tremendous pace. It was a
clear reach of the river, with Barking Level upon one side and the
melancholy Plumstead Marshes upon the other. At our hail the man in the
stern sprang up from the deck and shook his two clinched fists at us,
cursing the while in a high, cracked voice. He was a good-sized,
powerful man, and as he stood poising himself with legs astride I could
see that from the thigh downwards there was but a wooden stump upon the
right side. At the sound of his strident, angry cries there was
movement in the huddled bundle upon the deck. It straightened itself
into a little black man—the smallest I have ever seen—with a great,
misshapen head and a shock of tangled, dishevelled hair. Holmes had
already drawn his revolver, and I whipped out mine at the sight of this
savage, distorted creature. He was wrapped in some sort of dark ulster
or blanket, which left only his face exposed; but that face was enough
to give a man a sleepless night. Never have I seen features so deeply
marked with all bestiality and cruelty. His small eyes glowed and
burned with a sombre light, and his thick lips were writhed back from
his teeth, which grinned and chattered at us with a half animal fury.

“Fire if he raises his hand,” said Holmes, quietly. We were within a
boat’s-length by this time, and almost within touch of our quarry. I
can see the two of them now as they stood, the white man with his legs
far apart, shrieking out curses, and the unhallowed dwarf with his
hideous face, and his strong yellow teeth gnashing at us in the light
of our lantern.

It was well that we had so clear a view of him. Even as we looked he
plucked out from under his covering a short, round piece of wood, like
a school-ruler, and clapped it to his lips. Our pistols rang out
together. He whirled round, threw up his arms, and with a kind of
choking cough fell sideways into the stream. I caught one glimpse of
his venomous, menacing eyes amid the white swirl of the waters. At the
same moment the wooden-legged man threw himself upon the rudder and put
it hard down, so that his boat made straight in for the southern bank,
while we shot past her stern, only clearing her by a few feet. We were
round after her in an instant, but she was already nearly at the bank.
It was a wild and desolate place, where the moon glimmered upon a wide
expanse of marsh-land, with pools of stagnant water and beds of
decaying vegetation. The launch with a dull thud ran up upon the
mud-bank, with her bow in the air and her stern flush with the water.
The fugitive sprang out, but his stump instantly sank its whole length
into the sodden soil. In vain he struggled and writhed. Not one step
could he possibly take either forwards or backwards. He yelled in
impotent rage, and kicked frantically into the mud with his other foot,
but his struggles only bored his wooden pin the deeper into the sticky
bank. When we brought our launch alongside he was so firmly anchored
that it was only by throwing the end of a rope over his shoulders that
we were able to haul him out, and to drag him, like some evil fish,
over our side. The two Smiths, father and son, sat sullenly in their
launch, but came aboard meekly enough when commanded. The _Aurora_
herself we hauled off and made fast to our stern. A solid iron chest of
Indian workmanship stood upon the deck. This, there could be no
question, was the same that had contained the ill-omened treasure of
the Sholtos. There was no key, but it was of considerable weight, so we
transferred it carefully to our own little cabin. As we steamed slowly
up-stream again, we flashed our search-light in every direction, but
there was no sign of the Islander. Somewhere in the dark ooze at the
bottom of the Thames lie the bones of that strange visitor to our
shores.

“See here,” said Holmes, pointing to the wooden hatchway. “We were
hardly quick enough with our pistols.” There, sure enough, just behind
where we had been standing, stuck one of those murderous darts which we
knew so well. It must have whizzed between us at the instant that we
fired. Holmes smiled at it and shrugged his shoulders in his easy
fashion, but I confess that it turned me sick to think of the horrible
death which had passed so close to us that night.




Chapter XI
The Great Agra Treasure


Our captive sat in the cabin opposite to the iron box which he had done
so much and waited so long to gain. He was a sunburned, reckless-eyed
fellow, with a network of lines and wrinkles all over his mahogany
features, which told of a hard, open-air life. There was a singular
prominence about his bearded chin which marked a man who was not to be
easily turned from his purpose. His age may have been fifty or
thereabouts, for his black, curly hair was thickly shot with grey. His
face in repose was not an unpleasing one, though his heavy brows and
aggressive chin gave him, as I had lately seen, a terrible expression
when moved to anger. He sat now with his handcuffed hands upon his lap,
and his head sunk upon his breast, while he looked with his keen,
twinkling eyes at the box which had been the cause of his ill-doings.
It seemed to me that there was more sorrow than anger in his rigid and
contained countenance. Once he looked up at me with a gleam of
something like humour in his eyes.

“Well, Jonathan Small,” said Holmes, lighting a cigar, “I am sorry that
it has come to this.”

“And so am I, sir,” he answered, frankly. “I don’t believe that I can
swing over the job. I give you my word on the book that I never raised
hand against Mr. Sholto. It was that little hell-hound Tonga who shot
one of his cursed darts into him. I had no part in it, sir. I was as
grieved as if it had been my blood-relation. I welted the little devil
with the slack end of the rope for it, but it was done, and I could not
undo it again.”

“Have a cigar,” said Holmes; “and you had best take a pull out of my
flask, for you are very wet. How could you expect so small and weak a
man as this black fellow to overpower Mr. Sholto and hold him while you
were climbing the rope?”

“You seem to know as much about it as if you were there, sir. The truth
is that I hoped to find the room clear. I knew the habits of the house
pretty well, and it was the time when Mr. Sholto usually went down to
his supper. I shall make no secret of the business. The best defence
that I can make is just the simple truth. Now, if it had been the old
major I would have swung for him with a light heart. I would have
thought no more of knifing him than of smoking this cigar. But it’s
cursed hard that I should be lagged over this young Sholto, with whom I
had no quarrel whatever.”

“You are under the charge of Mr. Athelney Jones, of Scotland Yard. He
is going to bring you up to my rooms, and I shall ask you for a true
account of the matter. You must make a clean breast of it, for if you
do I hope that I may be of use to you. I think I can prove that the
poison acts so quickly that the man was dead before ever you reached
the room.”

“That he was, sir. I never got such a turn in my life as when I saw him
grinning at me with his head on his shoulder as I climbed through the
window. It fairly shook me, sir. I’d have half killed Tonga for it if
he had not scrambled off. That was how he came to leave his club, and
some of his darts too, as he tells me, which I dare say helped to put
you on our track; though how you kept on it is more than I can tell. I
don’t feel no malice against you for it. But it does seem a queer
thing,” he added, with a bitter smile, “that I who have a fair claim to
nigh upon half a million of money should spend the first half of my
life building a breakwater in the Andamans, and am like to spend the
other half digging drains at Dartmoor. It was an evil day for me when
first I clapped eyes upon the merchant Achmet and had to do with the
Agra treasure, which never brought anything but a curse yet upon the
man who owned it. To him it brought murder, to Major Sholto it brought
fear and guilt, to me it has meant slavery for life.”

At this moment Athelney Jones thrust his broad face and heavy shoulders
into the tiny cabin. “Quite a family party,” he remarked. “I think I
shall have a pull at that flask, Holmes. Well, I think we may all
congratulate each other. Pity we didn’t take the other alive; but there
was no choice. I say, Holmes, you must confess that you cut it rather
fine. It was all we could do to overhaul her.”

“All is well that ends well,” said Holmes. “But I certainly did not
know that the _Aurora_ was such a clipper.”

“Smith says she is one of the fastest launches on the river, and that
if he had had another man to help him with the engines we should never
have caught her. He swears he knew nothing of this Norwood business.”

“Neither he did,” cried our prisoner,—“not a word. I chose his launch
because I heard that she was a flier. We told him nothing, but we paid
him well, and he was to get something handsome if we reached our
vessel, the _Esmeralda_, at Gravesend, outward bound for the Brazils.”

“Well, if he has done no wrong we shall see that no wrong comes to him.
If we are pretty quick in catching our men, we are not so quick in
condemning them.” It was amusing to notice how the consequential Jones
was already beginning to give himself airs on the strength of the
capture. From the slight smile which played over Sherlock Holmes’s
face, I could see that the speech had not been lost upon him.

“We will be at Vauxhall Bridge presently,” said Jones, “and shall land
you, Dr. Watson, with the treasure-box. I need hardly tell you that I
am taking a very grave responsibility upon myself in doing this. It is
most irregular; but of course an agreement is an agreement. I must,
however, as a matter of duty, send an inspector with you, since you
have so valuable a charge. You will drive, no doubt?”

“Yes, I shall drive.”

“It is a pity there is no key, that we may make an inventory first. You
will have to break it open. Where is the key, my man?”

“At the bottom of the river,” said Small, shortly.

“Hum! There was no use your giving this unnecessary trouble. We have
had work enough already through you. However, doctor, I need not warn
you to be careful. Bring the box back with you to the Baker Street
rooms. You will find us there, on our way to the station.”

They landed me at Vauxhall, with my heavy iron box, and with a bluff,
genial inspector as my companion. A quarter of an hour’s drive brought
us to Mrs. Cecil Forrester’s. The servant seemed surprised at so late a
visitor. Mrs. Cecil Forrester was out for the evening, she explained,
and likely to be very late. Miss Morstan, however, was in the
drawing-room: so to the drawing-room I went, box in hand, leaving the
obliging inspector in the cab.

She was seated by the open window, dressed in some sort of white
diaphanous material, with a little touch of scarlet at the neck and
waist. The soft light of a shaded lamp fell upon her as she leaned back
in the basket chair, playing over her sweet, grave face, and tinting
with a dull, metallic sparkle the rich coils of her luxuriant hair. One
white arm and hand drooped over the side of the chair, and her whole
pose and figure spoke of an absorbing melancholy. At the sound of my
foot-fall she sprang to her feet, however, and a bright flush of
surprise and of pleasure coloured her pale cheeks.

“I heard a cab drive up,” she said. “I thought that Mrs. Forrester had
come back very early, but I never dreamed that it might be you. What
news have you brought me?”

“I have brought something better than news,” said I, putting down the
box upon the table and speaking jovially and boisterously, though my
heart was heavy within me. “I have brought you something which is worth
all the news in the world. I have brought you a fortune.”

She glanced at the iron box. “Is that the treasure, then?” she asked,
coolly enough.

“Yes, this is the great Agra treasure. Half of it is yours and half is
Thaddeus Sholto’s. You will have a couple of hundred thousand each.
Think of that! An annuity of ten thousand pounds. There will be few
richer young ladies in England. Is it not glorious?”

I think that I must have been rather overacting my delight, and that
she detected a hollow ring in my congratulations, for I saw her
eyebrows rise a little, and she glanced at me curiously.

“If I have it,” said she, “I owe it to you.”

“No, no,” I answered, “not to me, but to my friend Sherlock Holmes.
With all the will in the world, I could never have followed up a clue
which has taxed even his analytical genius. As it was, we very nearly
lost it at the last moment.”

“Pray sit down and tell me all about it, Dr. Watson,” said she.

I narrated briefly what had occurred since I had seen her
last,—Holmes’s new method of search, the discovery of the _Aurora_, the
appearance of Athelney Jones, our expedition in the evening, and the
wild chase down the Thames. She listened with parted lips and shining
eyes to my recital of our adventures. When I spoke of the dart which
had so narrowly missed us, she turned so white that I feared that she
was about to faint.

“It is nothing,” she said, as I hastened to pour her out some water. “I
am all right again. It was a shock to me to hear that I had placed my
friends in such horrible peril.”

“That is all over,” I answered. “It was nothing. I will tell you no
more gloomy details. Let us turn to something brighter. There is the
treasure. What could be brighter than that? I got leave to bring it
with me, thinking that it would interest you to be the first to see
it.”

“It would be of the greatest interest to me,” she said. There was no
eagerness in her voice, however. It had struck her, doubtless, that it
might seem ungracious upon her part to be indifferent to a prize which
had cost so much to win.

“What a pretty box!” she said, stooping over it. “This is Indian work,
I suppose?”

“Yes; it is Benares metal-work.”

“And so heavy!” she exclaimed, trying to raise it. “The box alone must
be of some value. Where is the key?”

“Small threw it into the Thames,” I answered. “I must borrow Mrs.
Forrester’s poker.” There was in the front a thick and broad hasp,
wrought in the image of a sitting Buddha. Under this I thrust the end
of the poker and twisted it outward as a lever. The hasp sprang open
with a loud snap. With trembling fingers I flung back the lid. We both
stood gazing in astonishment. The box was empty!

No wonder that it was heavy. The iron-work was two-thirds of an inch
thick all round. It was massive, well made, and solid, like a chest
constructed to carry things of great price, but not one shred or crumb
of metal or jewelry lay within it. It was absolutely and completely
empty.

“The treasure is lost,” said Miss Morstan, calmly.

As I listened to the words and realised what they meant, a great shadow
seemed to pass from my soul. I did not know how this Agra treasure had
weighed me down, until now that it was finally removed. It was selfish,
no doubt, disloyal, wrong, but I could realise nothing save that the
golden barrier was gone from between us. “Thank God!” I ejaculated from
my very heart.

She looked at me with a quick, questioning smile. “Why do you say
that?” she asked.

“Because you are within my reach again,” I said, taking her hand. She
did not withdraw it. “Because I love you, Mary, as truly as ever a man
loved a woman. Because this treasure, these riches, sealed my lips. Now
that they are gone I can tell you how I love you. That is why I said,
‘Thank God.’”

“Then I say, ‘Thank God,’ too,” she whispered, as I drew her to my
side. Whoever had lost a treasure, I knew that night that I had gained
one.




Chapter XII
The Strange Story of Jonathan Small


A very patient man was that inspector in the cab, for it was a weary
time before I rejoined him. His face clouded over when I showed him the
empty box.

“There goes the reward!” said he, gloomily. “Where there is no money
there is no pay. This night’s work would have been worth a tenner each
to Sam Brown and me if the treasure had been there.”

“Mr. Thaddeus Sholto is a rich man,” I said. “He will see that you are
rewarded, treasure or no.”

The inspector shook his head despondently, however. “It’s a bad job,”
he repeated; “and so Mr. Athelney Jones will think.”

His forecast proved to be correct, for the detective looked blank
enough when I got to Baker Street and showed him the empty box. They
had only just arrived, Holmes, the prisoner, and he, for they had
changed their plans so far as to report themselves at a station upon
the way. My companion lounged in his arm-chair with his usual listless
expression, while Small sat stolidly opposite to him with his wooden
leg cocked over his sound one. As I exhibited the empty box he leaned
back in his chair and laughed aloud.

“This is your doing, Small,” said Athelney Jones, angrily.

“Yes, I have put it away where you shall never lay hand upon it,” he
cried, exultantly. “It is my treasure; and if I can’t have the loot
I’ll take darned good care that no one else does. I tell you that no
living man has any right to it, unless it is three men who are in the
Andaman convict-barracks and myself. I know now that I cannot have the
use of it, and I know that they cannot. I have acted all through for
them as much as for myself. It’s been the sign of four with us always.
Well I know that they would have had me do just what I have done, and
throw the treasure into the Thames rather than let it go to kith or kin
of Sholto or of Morstan. It was not to make them rich that we did for
Achmet. You’ll find the treasure where the key is, and where little
Tonga is. When I saw that your launch must catch us, I put the loot
away in a safe place. There are no rupees for you this journey.”

“You are deceiving us, Small,” said Athelney Jones, sternly. “If you
had wished to throw the treasure into the Thames it would have been
easier for you to have thrown box and all.”

“Easier for me to throw, and easier for you to recover,” he answered,
with a shrewd, sidelong look. “The man that was clever enough to hunt
me down is clever enough to pick an iron box from the bottom of a
river. Now that they are scattered over five miles or so, it may be a
harder job. It went to my heart to do it, though. I was half mad when
you came up with us. However, there’s no good grieving over it. I’ve
had ups in my life, and I’ve had downs, but I’ve learned not to cry
over spilled milk.”

“This is a very serious matter, Small,” said the detective. “If you had
helped justice, instead of thwarting it in this way, you would have had
a better chance at your trial.”

“Justice!” snarled the ex-convict. “A pretty justice! Whose loot is
this, if it is not ours? Where is the justice that I should give it up
to those who have never earned it? Look how I have earned it! Twenty
long years in that fever-ridden swamp, all day at work under the
mangrove-tree, all night chained up in the filthy convict-huts, bitten
by mosquitoes, racked with ague, bullied by every cursed black-faced
policeman who loved to take it out of a white man. That was how I
earned the Agra treasure; and you talk to me of justice because I
cannot bear to feel that I have paid this price only that another may
enjoy it! I would rather swing a score of times, or have one of Tonga’s
darts in my hide, than live in a convict’s cell and feel that another
man is at his ease in a palace with the money that should be mine.”
Small had dropped his mask of stoicism, and all this came out in a wild
whirl of words, while his eyes blazed, and the handcuffs clanked
together with the impassioned movement of his hands. I could
understand, as I saw the fury and the passion of the man, that it was
no groundless or unnatural terror which had possessed Major Sholto when
he first learned that the injured convict was upon his track.

“You forget that we know nothing of all this,” said Holmes quietly. “We
have not heard your story, and we cannot tell how far justice may
originally have been on your side.”

“Well, sir, you have been very fair-spoken to me, though I can see that
I have you to thank that I have these bracelets upon my wrists. Still,
I bear no grudge for that. It is all fair and above-board. If you want
to hear my story I have no wish to hold it back. What I say to you is
God’s truth, every word of it. Thank you; you can put the glass beside
me here, and I’ll put my lips to it if I am dry.

“I am a Worcestershire man myself,—born near Pershore. I dare say you
would find a heap of Smalls living there now if you were to look. I
have often thought of taking a look round there, but the truth is that
I was never much of a credit to the family, and I doubt if they would
be so very glad to see me. They were all steady, chapel-going folk,
small farmers, well-known and respected over the country-side, while I
was always a bit of a rover. At last, however, when I was about
eighteen, I gave them no more trouble, for I got into a mess over a
girl, and could only get out of it again by taking the Queen’s shilling
and joining the 3rd Buffs, which was just starting for India.

“I wasn’t destined to do much soldiering, however. I had just got past
the goose-step, and learned to handle my musket, when I was fool enough
to go swimming in the Ganges. Luckily for me, my company sergeant, John
Holder, was in the water at the same time, and he was one of the finest
swimmers in the service. A crocodile took me, just as I was half-way
across, and nipped off my right leg as clean as a surgeon could have
done it, just above the knee. What with the shock and the loss of
blood, I fainted, and should have drowned if Holder had not caught hold
of me and paddled for the bank. I was five months in hospital over it,
and when at last I was able to limp out of it with this timber toe
strapped to my stump I found myself invalided out of the army and
unfitted for any active occupation.

“I was, as you can imagine, pretty down on my luck at this time, for I
was a useless cripple though not yet in my twentieth year. However, my
misfortune soon proved to be a blessing in disguise. A man named Abel
White, who had come out there as an indigo-planter, wanted an overseer
to look after his coolies and keep them up to their work. He happened
to be a friend of our colonel’s, who had taken an interest in me since
the accident. To make a long story short, the colonel recommended me
strongly for the post and, as the work was mostly to be done on
horseback, my leg was no great obstacle, for I had enough knee left to
keep good grip on the saddle. What I had to do was to ride over the
plantation, to keep an eye on the men as they worked, and to report the
idlers. The pay was fair, I had comfortable quarters, and altogether I
was content to spend the remainder of my life in indigo-planting. Mr.
Abel White was a kind man, and he would often drop into my little
shanty and smoke a pipe with me, for white folk out there feel their
hearts warm to each other as they never do here at home.

“Well, I was never in luck’s way long. Suddenly, without a note of
warning, the great mutiny broke upon us. One month India lay as still
and peaceful, to all appearance, as Surrey or Kent; the next there were
two hundred thousand black devils let loose, and the country was a
perfect hell. Of course you know all about it, gentlemen,—a deal more
than I do, very like, since reading is not in my line. I only know what
I saw with my own eyes. Our plantation was at a place called Muttra,
near the border of the Northwest Provinces. Night after night the whole
sky was alight with the burning bungalows, and day after day we had
small companies of Europeans passing through our estate with their
wives and children, on their way to Agra, where were the nearest
troops. Mr. Abel White was an obstinate man. He had it in his head that
the affair had been exaggerated, and that it would blow over as
suddenly as it had sprung up. There he sat on his veranda, drinking
whiskey-pegs and smoking cheroots, while the country was in a blaze
about him. Of course we stuck by him, I and Dawson, who, with his wife,
used to do the book-work and the managing. Well, one fine day the crash
came. I had been away on a distant plantation, and was riding slowly
home in the evening, when my eye fell upon something all huddled
together at the bottom of a steep nullah. I rode down to see what it
was, and the cold struck through my heart when I found it was Dawson’s
wife, all cut into ribbons, and half eaten by jackals and native dogs.
A little further up the road Dawson himself was lying on his face,
quite dead, with an empty revolver in his hand and four Sepoys lying
across each other in front of him. I reined up my horse, wondering
which way I should turn, but at that moment I saw thick smoke curling
up from Abel White’s bungalow and the flames beginning to burst through
the roof. I knew then that I could do my employer no good, but would
only throw my own life away if I meddled in the matter. From where I
stood I could see hundreds of the black fiends, with their red coats
still on their backs, dancing and howling round the burning house. Some
of them pointed at me, and a couple of bullets sang past my head; so I
broke away across the paddy-fields, and found myself late at night safe
within the walls at Agra.

“As it proved, however, there was no great safety there, either. The
whole country was up like a swarm of bees. Wherever the English could
collect in little bands they held just the ground that their guns
commanded. Everywhere else they were helpless fugitives. It was a fight
of the millions against the hundreds; and the cruellest part of it was
that these men that we fought against, foot, horse, and gunners, were
our own picked troops, whom we had taught and trained, handling our own
weapons, and blowing our own bugle-calls. At Agra there were the 3rd
Bengal Fusiliers, some Sikhs, two troops of horse, and a battery of
artillery. A volunteer corps of clerks and merchants had been formed,
and this I joined, wooden leg and all. We went out to meet the rebels
at Shahgunge early in July, and we beat them back for a time, but our
powder gave out, and we had to fall back upon the city.

“Nothing but the worst news came to us from every side,—which is not to
be wondered at, for if you look at the map you will see that we were
right in the heart of it. Lucknow is rather better than a hundred miles
to the east, and Cawnpore about as far to the south. From every point
on the compass there was nothing but torture and murder and outrage.

“The city of Agra is a great place, swarming with fanatics and fierce
devil-worshippers of all sorts. Our handful of men were lost among the
narrow, winding streets. Our leader moved across the river, therefore,
and took up his position in the old fort at Agra. I don’t know if any
of you gentlemen have ever read or heard anything of that old fort. It
is a very queer place,—the queerest that ever I was in, and I have been
in some rum corners, too. First of all, it is enormous in size. I
should think that the enclosure must be acres and acres. There is a
modern part, which took all our garrison, women, children, stores, and
everything else, with plenty of room over. But the modern part is
nothing like the size of the old quarter, where nobody goes, and which
is given over to the scorpions and the centipedes. It is all full of
great deserted halls, and winding passages, and long corridors twisting
in and out, so that it is easy enough for folk to get lost in it. For
this reason it was seldom that any one went into it, though now and
again a party with torches might go exploring.

“The river washes along the front of the old fort, and so protects it,
but on the sides and behind there are many doors, and these had to be
guarded, of course, in the old quarter as well as in that which was
actually held by our troops. We were short-handed, with hardly men
enough to man the angles of the building and to serve the guns. It was
impossible for us, therefore, to station a strong guard at every one of
the innumerable gates. What we did was to organise a central
guard-house in the middle of the fort, and to leave each gate under the
charge of one white man and two or three natives. I was selected to
take charge during certain hours of the night of a small isolated door
upon the southwest side of the building. Two Sikh troopers were placed
under my command, and I was instructed if anything went wrong to fire
my musket, when I might rely upon help coming at once from the central
guard. As the guard was a good two hundred paces away, however, and as
the space between was cut up into a labyrinth of passages and
corridors, I had great doubts as to whether they could arrive in time
to be of any use in case of an actual attack.

“Well, I was pretty proud at having this small command given me, since
I was a raw recruit, and a game-legged one at that. For two nights I
kept the watch with my Punjaubees. They were tall, fierce-looking
chaps, Mahomet Singh and Abdullah Khan by name, both old fighting-men
who had borne arms against us at Chilian-wallah. They could talk
English pretty well, but I could get little out of them. They preferred
to stand together and jabber all night in their queer Sikh lingo. For
myself, I used to stand outside the gateway, looking down on the broad,
winding river and on the twinkling lights of the great city. The
beating of drums, the rattle of tomtoms, and the yells and howls of the
rebels, drunk with opium and with bang, were enough to remind us all
night of our dangerous neighbours across the stream. Every two hours
the officer of the night used to come round to all the posts, to make
sure that all was well.

“The third night of my watch was dark and dirty, with a small, driving
rain. It was dreary work standing in the gateway hour after hour in
such weather. I tried again and again to make my Sikhs talk, but
without much success. At two in the morning the rounds passed, and
broke for a moment the weariness of the night. Finding that my
companions would not be led into conversation, I took out my pipe, and
laid down my musket to strike the match. In an instant the two Sikhs
were upon me. One of them snatched my firelock up and levelled it at my
head, while the other held a great knife to my throat and swore between
his teeth that he would plunge it into me if I moved a step.

“My first thought was that these fellows were in league with the
rebels, and that this was the beginning of an assault. If our door were
in the hands of the Sepoys the place must fall, and the women and
children be treated as they were in Cawnpore. Maybe you gentlemen think
that I am just making out a case for myself, but I give you my word
that when I thought of that, though I felt the point of the knife at my
throat, I opened my mouth with the intention of giving a scream, if it
was my last one, which might alarm the main guard. The man who held me
seemed to know my thoughts; for, even as I braced myself to it, he
whispered, ‘Don’t make a noise. The fort is safe enough. There are no
rebel dogs on this side of the river.’ There was the ring of truth in
what he said, and I knew that if I raised my voice I was a dead man. I
could read it in the fellow’s brown eyes. I waited, therefore, in
silence, to see what it was that they wanted from me.

“‘Listen to me, Sahib,’ said the taller and fiercer of the pair, the
one whom they called Abdullah Khan. ‘You must either be with us now or
you must be silenced forever. The thing is too great a one for us to
hesitate. Either you are heart and soul with us on your oath on the
cross of the Christians, or your body this night shall be thrown into
the ditch and we shall pass over to our brothers in the rebel army.
There is no middle way. Which is it to be, death or life? We can only
give you three minutes to decide, for the time is passing, and all must
be done before the rounds come again.’

“‘How can I decide?’ said I. ‘You have not told me what you want of me.
But I tell you now that if it is anything against the safety of the
fort I will have no truck with it, so you can drive home your knife and
welcome.’

“‘It is nothing against the fort,’ said he. ‘We only ask you to do that
which your countrymen come to this land for. We ask you to be rich. If
you will be one of us this night, we will swear to you upon the naked
knife, and by the threefold oath which no Sikh was ever known to break,
that you shall have your fair share of the loot. A quarter of the
treasure shall be yours. We can say no fairer.’

“‘But what is the treasure, then?’ I asked. ‘I am as ready to be rich
as you can be, if you will but show me how it can be done.’

“‘You will swear, then,’ said he, ‘by the bones of your father, by the
honour of your mother, by the cross of your faith, to raise no hand and
speak no word against us, either now or afterwards?’

“‘I will swear it,’ I answered, ‘provided that the fort is not
endangered.’

“‘Then my comrade and I will swear that you shall have a quarter of the
treasure which shall be equally divided among the four of us.’

“‘There are but three,’ said I.

“‘No; Dost Akbar must have his share. We can tell the tale to you while
we await them. Do you stand at the gate, Mahomet Singh, and give notice
of their coming. The thing stands thus, Sahib, and I tell it to you
because I know that an oath is binding upon a Feringhee, and that we
may trust you. Had you been a lying Hindoo, though you had sworn by all
the gods in their false temples, your blood would have been upon the
knife, and your body in the water. But the Sikh knows the Englishman,
and the Englishman knows the Sikh. Hearken, then, to what I have to
say.

“‘There is a rajah in the northern provinces who has much wealth,
though his lands are small. Much has come to him from his father, and
more still he has set by himself, for he is of a low nature and hoards
his gold rather than spend it. When the troubles broke out he would be
friends both with the lion and the tiger,—with the Sepoy and with the
Company’s Raj. Soon, however, it seemed to him that the white men’s day
was come, for through all the land he could hear of nothing but of
their death and their overthrow. Yet, being a careful man, he made such
plans that, come what might, half at least of his treasure should be
left to him. That which was in gold and silver he kept by him in the
vaults of his palace, but the most precious stones and the choicest
pearls that he had he put in an iron box, and sent it by a trusty
servant who, under the guise of a merchant, should take it to the fort
at Agra, there to lie until the land is at peace. Thus, if the rebels
won he would have his money, but if the Company conquered his jewels
would be saved to him. Having thus divided his hoard, he threw himself
into the cause of the Sepoys, since they were strong upon his borders.
By doing this, mark you, Sahib, his property becomes the due of those
who have been true to their salt.

“‘This pretended merchant, who travels under the name of Achmet, is now
in the city of Agra, and desires to gain his way into the fort. He has
with him as travelling-companion my foster-brother Dost Akbar, who
knows his secret. Dost Akbar has promised this night to lead him to a
side-postern of the fort, and has chosen this one for his purpose. Here
he will come presently, and here he will find Mahomet Singh and myself
awaiting him. The place is lonely, and none shall know of his coming.
The world shall know of the merchant Achmet no more, but the great
treasure of the rajah shall be divided among us. What say you to it,
Sahib?’

“In Worcestershire the life of a man seems a great and a sacred thing;
but it is very different when there is fire and blood all round you and
you have been used to meeting death at every turn. Whether Achmet the
merchant lived or died was a thing as light as air to me, but at the
talk about the treasure my heart turned to it, and I thought of what I
might do in the old country with it, and how my folk would stare when
they saw their ne’er-do-well coming back with his pockets full of gold
moidores. I had, therefore, already made up my mind. Abdullah Khan,
however, thinking that I hesitated, pressed the matter more closely.

“‘Consider, Sahib,’ said he, ‘that if this man is taken by the
commandant he will be hung or shot, and his jewels taken by the
government, so that no man will be a rupee the better for them. Now,
since we do the taking of him, why should we not do the rest as well?
The jewels will be as well with us as in the Company’s coffers. There
will be enough to make every one of us rich men and great chiefs. No
one can know about the matter, for here we are cut off from all men.
What could be better for the purpose? Say again, then, Sahib, whether
you are with us, or if we must look upon you as an enemy.’

“‘I am with you heart and soul,’ said I.

“‘It is well,’ he answered, handing me back my firelock. ‘You see that
we trust you, for your word, like ours, is not to be broken. We have
now only to wait for my brother and the merchant.’

“‘Does your brother know, then, of what you will do?’ I asked.

“‘The plan is his. He has devised it. We will go to the gate and share
the watch with Mahomet Singh.’

“The rain was still falling steadily, for it was just the beginning of
the wet season. Brown, heavy clouds were drifting across the sky, and
it was hard to see more than a stone-cast. A deep moat lay in front of
our door, but the water was in places nearly dried up, and it could
easily be crossed. It was strange to me to be standing there with those
two wild Punjaubees waiting for the man who was coming to his death.

“Suddenly my eye caught the glint of a shaded lantern at the other side
of the moat. It vanished among the mound-heaps, and then appeared again
coming slowly in our direction.

“‘Here they are!’ I exclaimed.

“‘You will challenge him, Sahib, as usual,’ whispered Abdullah. ‘Give
him no cause for fear. Send us in with him, and we shall do the rest
while you stay here on guard. Have the lantern ready to uncover, that
we may be sure that it is indeed the man.’

“The light had flickered onwards, now stopping and now advancing, until
I could see two dark figures upon the other side of the moat. I let
them scramble down the sloping bank, splash through the mire, and climb
half-way up to the gate, before I challenged them.

“‘Who goes there?’ said I, in a subdued voice.

“‘Friends,’ came the answer. I uncovered my lantern and threw a flood
of light upon them. The first was an enormous Sikh, with a black beard
which swept nearly down to his cummerbund. Outside of a show I have
never seen so tall a man. The other was a little, fat, round fellow,
with a great yellow turban, and a bundle in his hand, done up in a
shawl. He seemed to be all in a quiver with fear, for his hands
twitched as if he had the ague, and his head kept turning to left and
right with two bright little twinkling eyes, like a mouse when he
ventures out from his hole. It gave me the chills to think of killing
him, but I thought of the treasure, and my heart set as hard as a flint
within me. When he saw my white face he gave a little chirrup of joy
and came running up towards me.

“‘Your protection, Sahib,’ he panted,—‘your protection for the unhappy
merchant Achmet. I have travelled across Rajpootana that I might seek
the shelter of the fort at Agra. I have been robbed and beaten and
abused because I have been the friend of the Company. It is a blessed
night this when I am once more in safety,—I and my poor possessions.’

“‘What have you in the bundle?’ I asked.

“‘An iron box,’ he answered, ‘which contains one or two little family
matters which are of no value to others, but which I should be sorry to
lose. Yet I am not a beggar; and I shall reward you, young Sahib, and
your governor also, if he will give me the shelter I ask.’

“I could not trust myself to speak longer with the man. The more I
looked at his fat, frightened face, the harder did it seem that we
should slay him in cold blood. It was best to get it over.

“‘Take him to the main guard,’ said I. The two Sikhs closed in upon him
on each side, and the giant walked behind, while they marched in
through the dark gateway. Never was a man so compassed round with
death. I remained at the gateway with the lantern.

“I could hear the measured tramp of their footsteps sounding through
the lonely corridors. Suddenly it ceased, and I heard voices, and a
scuffle, with the sound of blows. A moment later there came, to my
horror, a rush of footsteps coming in my direction, with the loud
breathing of a running man. I turned my lantern down the long, straight
passage, and there was the fat man, running like the wind, with a smear
of blood across his face, and close at his heels, bounding like a
tiger, the great black-bearded Sikh, with a knife flashing in his hand.
I have never seen a man run so fast as that little merchant. He was
gaining on the Sikh, and I could see that if he once passed me and got
to the open air he would save himself yet. My heart softened to him,
but again the thought of his treasure turned me hard and bitter. I cast
my firelock between his legs as he raced past, and he rolled twice over
like a shot rabbit. Ere he could stagger to his feet the Sikh was upon
him, and buried his knife twice in his side. The man never uttered moan
nor moved muscle, but lay were he had fallen. I think myself that he
may have broken his neck with the fall. You see, gentlemen, that I am
keeping my promise. I am telling you every work of the business just
exactly as it happened, whether it is in my favour or not.”

He stopped, and held out his manacled hands for the whiskey-and-water
which Holmes had brewed for him. For myself, I confess that I had now
conceived the utmost horror of the man, not only for this cold-blooded
business in which he had been concerned, but even more for the somewhat
flippant and careless way in which he narrated it. Whatever punishment
was in store for him, I felt that he might expect no sympathy from me.
Sherlock Holmes and Jones sat with their hands upon their knees, deeply
interested in the story, but with the same disgust written upon their
faces. He may have observed it, for there was a touch of defiance in
his voice and manner as he proceeded.

“It was all very bad, no doubt,” said he. “I should like to know how
many fellows in my shoes would have refused a share of this loot when
they knew that they would have their throats cut for their pains.
Besides, it was my life or his when once he was in the fort. If he had
got out, the whole business would come to light, and I should have been
court-martialled and shot as likely as not; for people were not very
lenient at a time like that.”

“Go on with your story,” said Holmes, shortly.

“Well, we carried him in, Abdullah, Akbar, and I. A fine weight he was,
too, for all that he was so short. Mahomet Singh was left to guard the
door. We took him to a place which the Sikhs had already prepared. It
was some distance off, where a winding passage leads to a great empty
hall, the brick walls of which were all crumbling to pieces. The earth
floor had sunk in at one place, making a natural grave, so we left
Achmet the merchant there, having first covered him over with loose
bricks. This done, we all went back to the treasure.

“It lay where he had dropped it when he was first attacked. The box was
the same which now lies open upon your table. A key was hung by a
silken cord to that carved handle upon the top. We opened it, and the
light of the lantern gleamed upon a collection of gems such as I have
read of and thought about when I was a little lad at Pershore. It was
blinding to look upon them. When we had feasted our eyes we took them
all out and made a list of them. There were one hundred and forty-three
diamonds of the first water, including one which has been called, I
believe, ‘the Great Mogul’ and is said to be the second largest stone
in existence. Then there were ninety-seven very fine emeralds, and one
hundred and seventy rubies, some of which, however, were small. There
were forty carbuncles, two hundred and ten sapphires, sixty-one agates,
and a great quantity of beryls, onyxes, cats’-eyes, turquoises, and
other stones, the very names of which I did not know at the time,
though I have become more familiar with them since. Besides this, there
were nearly three hundred very fine pearls, twelve of which were set in
a gold coronet. By the way, these last had been taken out of the chest
and were not there when I recovered it.

“After we had counted our treasures we put them back into the chest and
carried them to the gateway to show them to Mahomet Singh. Then we
solemnly renewed our oath to stand by each other and be true to our
secret. We agreed to conceal our loot in a safe place until the country
should be at peace again, and then to divide it equally among
ourselves. There was no use dividing it at present, for if gems of such
value were found upon us it would cause suspicion, and there was no
privacy in the fort nor any place where we could keep them. We carried
the box, therefore, into the same hall where we had buried the body,
and there, under certain bricks in the best-preserved wall, we made a
hollow and put our treasure. We made careful note of the place, and
next day I drew four plans, one for each of us, and put the sign of the
four of us at the bottom, for we had sworn that we should each always
act for all, so that none might take advantage. That is an oath that I
can put my hand to my heart and swear that I have never broken.

“Well, there’s no use my telling you gentlemen what came of the Indian
mutiny. After Wilson took Delhi and Sir Colin relieved Lucknow the back
of the business was broken. Fresh troops came pouring in, and Nana
Sahib made himself scarce over the frontier. A flying column under
Colonel Greathed came round to Agra and cleared the Pandies away from
it. Peace seemed to be settling upon the country, and we four were
beginning to hope that the time was at hand when we might safely go off
with our shares of the plunder. In a moment, however, our hopes were
shattered by our being arrested as the murderers of Achmet.

“It came about in this way. When the rajah put his jewels into the
hands of Achmet he did it because he knew that he was a trusty man.
They are suspicious folk in the East, however: so what does this rajah
do but take a second even more trusty servant and set him to play the
spy upon the first? This second man was ordered never to let Achmet out
of his sight, and he followed him like his shadow. He went after him
that night and saw him pass through the doorway. Of course he thought
he had taken refuge in the fort, and applied for admission there
himself next day, but could find no trace of Achmet. This seemed to him
so strange that he spoke about it to a sergeant of guides, who brought
it to the ears of the commandant. A thorough search was quickly made,
and the body was discovered. Thus at the very moment that we thought
that all was safe we were all four seized and brought to trial on a
charge of murder,—three of us because we had held the gate that night,
and the fourth because he was known to have been in the company of the
murdered man. Not a word about the jewels came out at the trial, for
the rajah had been deposed and driven out of India: so no one had any
particular interest in them. The murder, however, was clearly made out,
and it was certain that we must all have been concerned in it. The
three Sikhs got penal servitude for life, and I was condemned to death,
though my sentence was afterwards commuted into the same as the others.

“It was rather a queer position that we found ourselves in then. There
we were all four tied by the leg and with precious little chance of
ever getting out again, while we each held a secret which might have
put each of us in a palace if we could only have made use of it. It was
enough to make a man eat his heart out to have to stand the kick and
the cuff of every petty jack-in-office, to have rice to eat and water
to drink, when that gorgeous fortune was ready for him outside, just
waiting to be picked up. It might have driven me mad; but I was always
a pretty stubborn one, so I just held on and bided my time.

“At last it seemed to me to have come. I was changed from Agra to
Madras, and from there to Blair Island in the Andamans. There are very
few white convicts at this settlement, and, as I had behaved well from
the first, I soon found myself a sort of privileged person. I was given
a hut in Hope Town, which is a small place on the slopes of Mount
Harriet, and I was left pretty much to myself. It is a dreary,
fever-stricken place, and all beyond our little clearings was infested
with wild cannibal natives, who were ready enough to blow a poisoned
dart at us if they saw a chance. There was digging, and ditching, and
yam-planting, and a dozen other things to be done, so we were busy
enough all day; though in the evening we had a little time to
ourselves. Among other things, I learned to dispense drugs for the
surgeon, and picked up a smattering of his knowledge. All the time I
was on the lookout for a chance of escape; but it is hundreds of miles
from any other land, and there is little or no wind in those seas: so
it was a terribly difficult job to get away.

“The surgeon, Dr. Somerton, was a fast, sporting young chap, and the
other young officers would meet in his rooms of an evening and play
cards. The surgery, where I used to make up my drugs, was next to his
sitting-room, with a small window between us. Often, if I felt
lonesome, I used to turn out the lamp in the surgery, and then,
standing there, I could hear their talk and watch their play. I am fond
of a hand at cards myself, and it was almost as good as having one to
watch the others. There was Major Sholto, Captain Morstan, and
Lieutenant Bromley Brown, who were in command of the native troops, and
there was the surgeon himself, and two or three prison-officials,
crafty old hands who played a nice sly safe game. A very snug little
party they used to make.

“Well, there was one thing which very soon struck me, and that was that
the soldiers used always to lose and the civilians to win. Mind, I
don’t say that there was anything unfair, but so it was. These
prison-chaps had done little else than play cards ever since they had
been at the Andamans, and they knew each other’s game to a point, while
the others just played to pass the time and threw their cards down
anyhow. Night after night the soldiers got up poorer men, and the
poorer they got the more keen they were to play. Major Sholto was the
hardest hit. He used to pay in notes and gold at first, but soon it
came to notes of hand and for big sums. He sometimes would win for a
few deals, just to give him heart, and then the luck would set in
against him worse than ever. All day he would wander about as black as
thunder, and he took to drinking a deal more than was good for him.

“One night he lost even more heavily than usual. I was sitting in my
hut when he and Captain Morstan came stumbling along on the way to
their quarters. They were bosom friends, those two, and never far
apart. The major was raving about his losses.

“‘It’s all up, Morstan,’ he was saying, as they passed my hut. ‘I shall
have to send in my papers. I am a ruined man.’

“‘Nonsense, old chap!’ said the other, slapping him upon the shoulder.
‘I’ve had a nasty facer myself, but—’ That was all I could hear, but it
was enough to set me thinking.

“A couple of days later Major Sholto was strolling on the beach: so I
took the chance of speaking to him.

“‘I wish to have your advice, major,’ said I.

“‘Well, Small, what is it?’ he asked, taking his cheroot from his lips.

“‘I wanted to ask you, sir,’ said I, ‘who is the proper person to whom
hidden treasure should be handed over. I know where half a million
worth lies, and, as I cannot use it myself, I thought perhaps the best
thing that I could do would be to hand it over to the proper
authorities, and then perhaps they would get my sentence shortened for
me.’

“‘Half a million, Small?’ he gasped, looking hard at me to see if I was
in earnest.

“‘Quite that, sir,—in jewels and pearls. It lies there ready for any
one. And the queer thing about it is that the real owner is outlawed
and cannot hold property, so that it belongs to the first comer.’

“‘To government, Small,’ he stammered,—‘to government.’ But he said it
in a halting fashion, and I knew in my heart that I had got him.

“‘You think, then, sir, that I should give the information to the
Governor-General?’ said I, quietly.

“‘Well, well, you must not do anything rash, or that you might repent.
Let me hear all about it, Small. Give me the facts.’

“I told him the whole story, with small changes so that he could not
identify the places. When I had finished he stood stock still and full
of thought. I could see by the twitch of his lip that there was a
struggle going on within him.

“‘This is a very important matter, Small,’ he said, at last. ‘You must
not say a word to any one about it, and I shall see you again soon.’

“Two nights later he and his friend Captain Morstan came to my hut in
the dead of the night with a lantern.

“‘I want you just to let Captain Morstan hear that story from your own
lips, Small,’ said he.

“I repeated it as I had told it before.

“‘It rings true, eh?’ said he. ‘It’s good enough to act upon?’

“Captain Morstan nodded.

“‘Look here, Small,’ said the major. ‘We have been talking it over, my
friend here and I, and we have come to the conclusion that this secret
of yours is hardly a government matter, after all, but is a private
concern of your own, which of course you have the power of disposing of
as you think best. Now, the question is, what price would you ask for
it? We might be inclined to take it up, and at least look into it, if
we could agree as to terms.’ He tried to speak in a cool, careless way,
but his eyes were shining with excitement and greed.

“‘Why, as to that, gentlemen,’ I answered, trying also to be cool, but
feeling as excited as he did, ‘there is only one bargain which a man in
my position can make. I shall want you to help me to my freedom, and to
help my three companions to theirs. We shall then take you into
partnership, and give you a fifth share to divide between you.’

“‘Hum!’ said he. ‘A fifth share! That is not very tempting.’

“‘It would come to fifty thousand apiece,’ said I.

“‘But how can we gain your freedom? You know very well that you ask an
impossibility.’

“‘Nothing of the sort,’ I answered. ‘I have thought it all out to the
last detail. The only bar to our escape is that we can get no boat fit
for the voyage, and no provisions to last us for so long a time. There
are plenty of little yachts and yawls at Calcutta or Madras which would
serve our turn well. Do you bring one over. We shall engage to get
aboard her by night, and if you will drop us on any part of the Indian
coast you will have done your part of the bargain.’

“‘If there were only one,’ he said.

“‘None or all,’ I answered. ‘We have sworn it. The four of us must
always act together.’

“‘You see, Morstan,’ said he, ‘Small is a man of his word. He does not
flinch from his friend. I think we may very well trust him.’

“‘It’s a dirty business,’ the other answered. ‘Yet, as you say, the
money would save our commissions handsomely.’

“‘Well, Small,’ said the major, ‘we must, I suppose, try and meet you.
We must first, of course, test the truth of your story. Tell me where
the box is hid, and I shall get leave of absence and go back to India
in the monthly relief-boat to inquire into the affair.’

“‘Not so fast,’ said I, growing colder as he got hot. ‘I must have the
consent of my three comrades. I tell you that it is four or none with
us.’

“‘Nonsense!’ he broke in. ‘What have three black fellows to do with our
agreement?’

“‘Black or blue,’ said I, ‘they are in with me, and we all go
together.’

“Well, the matter ended by a second meeting, at which Mahomet Singh,
Abdullah Khan, and Dost Akbar were all present. We talked the matter
over again, and at last we came to an arrangement. We were to provide
both the officers with charts of the part of the Agra fort and mark the
place in the wall where the treasure was hid. Major Sholto was to go to
India to test our story. If he found the box he was to leave it there,
to send out a small yacht provisioned for a voyage, which was to lie
off Rutland Island, and to which we were to make our way, and finally
to return to his duties. Captain Morstan was then to apply for leave of
absence, to meet us at Agra, and there we were to have a final division
of the treasure, he taking the major’s share as well as his own. All
this we sealed by the most solemn oaths that the mind could think or
the lips utter. I sat up all night with paper and ink, and by the
morning I had the two charts all ready, signed with the sign of
four,—that is, of Abdullah, Akbar, Mahomet, and myself.

“Well, gentlemen, I weary you with my long story, and I know that my
friend Mr. Jones is impatient to get me safely stowed in chokey. I’ll
make it as short as I can. The villain Sholto went off to India, but he
never came back again. Captain Morstan showed me his name among a list
of passengers in one of the mail-boats very shortly afterwards. His
uncle had died, leaving him a fortune, and he had left the army, yet he
could stoop to treat five men as he had treated us. Morstan went over
to Agra shortly afterwards, and found, as we expected, that the
treasure was indeed gone. The scoundrel had stolen it all, without
carrying out one of the conditions on which we had sold him the secret.
From that day I lived only for vengeance. I thought of it by day and I
nursed it by night. It became an overpowering, absorbing passion with
me. I cared nothing for the law,—nothing for the gallows. To escape, to
track down Sholto, to have my hand upon his throat,—that was my one
thought. Even the Agra treasure had come to be a smaller thing in my
mind than the slaying of Sholto.

“Well, I have set my mind on many things in this life, and never one
which I did not carry out. But it was weary years before my time came.
I have told you that I had picked up something of medicine. One day
when Dr. Somerton was down with a fever a little Andaman Islander was
picked up by a convict-gang in the woods. He was sick to death, and had
gone to a lonely place to die. I took him in hand, though he was as
venomous as a young snake, and after a couple of months I got him all
right and able to walk. He took a kind of fancy to me then, and would
hardly go back to his woods, but was always hanging about my hut. I
learned a little of his lingo from him, and this made him all the
fonder of me.

“Tonga—for that was his name—was a fine boatman, and owned a big, roomy
canoe of his own. When I found that he was devoted to me and would do
anything to serve me, I saw my chance of escape. I talked it over with
him. He was to bring his boat round on a certain night to an old wharf
which was never guarded, and there he was to pick me up. I gave him
directions to have several gourds of water and a lot of yams,
cocoa-nuts, and sweet potatoes.

“He was stanch and true, was little Tonga. No man ever had a more
faithful mate. At the night named he had his boat at the wharf. As it
chanced, however, there was one of the convict-guard down there,—a vile
Pathan who had never missed a chance of insulting and injuring me. I
had always vowed vengeance, and now I had my chance. It was as if fate
had placed him in my way that I might pay my debt before I left the
island. He stood on the bank with his back to me, and his carbine on
his shoulder. I looked about for a stone to beat out his brains with,
but none could I see. Then a queer thought came into my head and showed
me where I could lay my hand on a weapon. I sat down in the darkness
and unstrapped my wooden leg. With three long hops I was on him. He put
his carbine to his shoulder, but I struck him full, and knocked the
whole front of his skull in. You can see the split in the wood now
where I hit him. We both went down together, for I could not keep my
balance, but when I got up I found him still lying quiet enough. I made
for the boat, and in an hour we were well out at sea. Tonga had brought
all his earthly possessions with him, his arms and his gods. Among
other things, he had a long bamboo spear, and some Andaman cocoa-nut
matting, with which I made a sort of sail. For ten days we were beating
about, trusting to luck, and on the eleventh we were picked up by a
trader which was going from Singapore to Jiddah with a cargo of Malay
pilgrims. They were a rum crowd, and Tonga and I soon managed to settle
down among them. They had one very good quality: they let you alone and
asked no questions.

“Well, if I were to tell you all the adventures that my little chum and
I went through, you would not thank me, for I would have you here until
the sun was shining. Here and there we drifted about the world,
something always turning up to keep us from London. All the time,
however, I never lost sight of my purpose. I would dream of Sholto at
night. A hundred times I have killed him in my sleep. At last, however,
some three or four years ago, we found ourselves in England. I had no
great difficulty in finding where Sholto lived, and I set to work to
discover whether he had realised the treasure, or if he still had it. I
made friends with someone who could help me,—I name no names, for I
don’t want to get any one else in a hole,—and I soon found that he
still had the jewels. Then I tried to get at him in many ways; but he
was pretty sly, and had always two prize-fighters, besides his sons and
his khitmutgar, on guard over him.

“One day, however, I got word that he was dying. I hurried at once to
the garden, mad that he should slip out of my clutches like that, and,
looking through the window, I saw him lying in his bed, with his sons
on each side of him. I’d have come through and taken my chance with the
three of them, only even as I looked at him his jaw dropped, and I knew
that he was gone. I got into his room that same night, though, and I
searched his papers to see if there was any record of where he had
hidden our jewels. There was not a line, however: so I came away,
bitter and savage as a man could be. Before I left I bethought me that
if I ever met my Sikh friends again it would be a satisfaction to know
that I had left some mark of our hatred; so I scrawled down the sign of
the four of us, as it had been on the chart, and I pinned it on his
bosom. It was too much that he should be taken to the grave without
some token from the men whom he had robbed and befooled.

“We earned a living at this time by my exhibiting poor Tonga at fairs
and other such places as the black cannibal. He would eat raw meat and
dance his war-dance: so we always had a hatful of pennies after a day’s
work. I still heard all the news from Pondicherry Lodge, and for some
years there was no news to hear, except that they were hunting for the
treasure. At last, however, came what we had waited for so long. The
treasure had been found. It was up at the top of the house, in Mr.
Bartholomew Sholto’s chemical laboratory. I came at once and had a look
at the place, but I could not see how with my wooden leg I was to make
my way up to it. I learned, however, about a trap-door in the roof, and
also about Mr. Sholto’s supper-hour. It seemed to me that I could
manage the thing easily through Tonga. I brought him out with me with a
long rope wound round his waist. He could climb like a cat, and he soon
made his way through the roof, but, as ill luck would have it,
Bartholomew Sholto was still in the room, to his cost. Tonga thought he
had done something very clever in killing him, for when I came up by
the rope I found him strutting about as proud as a peacock. Very much
surprised was he when I made at him with the rope’s end and cursed him
for a little blood-thirsty imp. I took the treasure-box and let it
down, and then slid down myself, having first left the sign of the four
upon the table, to show that the jewels had come back at last to those
who had most right to them. Tonga then pulled up the rope, closed the
window, and made off the way that he had come.

“I don’t know that I have anything else to tell you. I had heard a
waterman speak of the speed of Smith’s launch the _Aurora_, so I
thought she would be a handy craft for our escape. I engaged with old
Smith, and was to give him a big sum if he got us safe to our ship. He
knew, no doubt, that there was some screw loose, but he was not in our
secrets. All this is the truth, and if I tell it to you, gentlemen, it
is not to amuse you,—for you have not done me a very good turn,—but it
is because I believe the best defence I can make is just to hold back
nothing, but let all the world know how badly I have myself been served
by Major Sholto, and how innocent I am of the death of his son.”

“A very remarkable account,” said Sherlock Holmes. “A fitting wind-up
to an extremely interesting case. There is nothing at all new to me in
the latter part of your narrative, except that you brought your own
rope. That I did not know. By the way, I had hoped that Tonga had lost
all his darts; yet he managed to shoot one at us in the boat.”

“He had lost them all, sir, except the one which was in his blow-pipe
at the time.”

“Ah, of course,” said Holmes. “I had not thought of that.”

“Is there any other point which you would like to ask about?” asked the
convict, affably.

“I think not, thank you,” my companion answered.

“Well, Holmes,” said Athelney Jones, “You are a man to be humoured, and
we all know that you are a connoisseur of crime, but duty is duty, and
I have gone rather far in doing what you and your friend asked me. I
shall feel more at ease when we have our story-teller here safe under
lock and key. The cab still waits, and there are two inspectors
downstairs. I am much obliged to you both for your assistance. Of
course you will be wanted at the trial. Good-night to you.”

“Good-night, gentlemen both,” said Jonathan Small.

“You first, Small,” remarked the wary Jones as they left the room.
“I’ll take particular care that you don’t club me with your wooden leg,
whatever you may have done to the gentleman at the Andaman Isles.”

“Well, and there is the end of our little drama,” I remarked, after we
had set some time smoking in silence. “I fear that it may be the last
investigation in which I shall have the chance of studying your
methods. Miss Morstan has done me the honour to accept me as a husband
in prospective.”

He gave a most dismal groan. “I feared as much,” said he. “I really
cannot congratulate you.”

I was a little hurt. “Have you any reason to be dissatisfied with my
choice?” I asked.

“Not at all. I think she is one of the most charming young ladies I
ever met, and might have been most useful in such work as we have been
doing. She had a decided genius that way: witness the way in which she
preserved that Agra plan from all the other papers of her father. But
love is an emotional thing, and whatever is emotional is opposed to
that true cold reason which I place above all things. I should never
marry myself, lest I bias my judgment.”

“I trust,” said I, laughing, “that my judgment may survive the ordeal.
But you look weary.”

“Yes, the reaction is already upon me. I shall be as limp as a rag for
a week.”

“Strange,” said I, “how terms of what in another man I should call
laziness alternate with your fits of splendid energy and vigour.”

“Yes,” he answered, “there are in me the makings of a very fine loafer
and also of a pretty spry sort of fellow. I often think of those lines
of old Goethe,—

Schade dass die Natur nur _einen_ Mensch aus Dir schuf,
Denn zum würdigen Mann war und zum Schelmen der Stoff.


“By the way, _à propos_ of this Norwood business, you see that they
had, as I surmised, a confederate in the house, who could be none other
than Lal Rao, the butler: so Jones actually has the undivided honour of
having caught one fish in his great haul.”

“The division seems rather unfair,” I remarked. “You have done all the
work in this business. I get a wife out of it, Jones gets the credit,
pray what remains for you?”

“For me,” said Sherlock Holmes, “there still remains the
cocaine-bottle.” And he stretched his long white hand up for it.

The Adventure of the Dying Detective


By

Sir Arthur Conan Doyle




Mrs. Hudson, the landlady of Sherlock Holmes, was a long-suffering
woman.  Not only was her first-floor flat invaded at all hours by
throngs of singular and often undesirable characters but her remarkable
lodger showed an eccentricity and irregularity in his life which must
have sorely tried her patience. His incredible untidiness, his
addiction to music at strange hours, his occasional revolver practice
within doors, his weird and often malodorous scientific experiments,
and the atmosphere of violence and danger which hung around him made
him the very worst tenant in London.  On the other hand, his payments
were princely. I have no doubt that the house might have been purchased
at the price which Holmes paid for his rooms during the years that I
was with him.

The landlady stood in the deepest awe of him and never dared to
interfere with him, however outrageous his proceedings might seem.  She
was fond of him, too, for he had a remarkable gentleness and courtesy
in his dealings with women.  He disliked and distrusted the sex, but he
was always a chivalrous opponent. Knowing how genuine was her regard
for him, I listened earnestly to her story when she came to my rooms in
the second year of my married life and told me of the sad condition to
which my poor friend was reduced.

"He's dying, Dr. Watson," said she.  "For three days he has been
sinking, and I doubt if he will last the day.  He would not let me get
a doctor.  This morning when I saw his bones sticking out of his face
and his great bright eyes looking at me I could stand no more of it.
'With your leave or without it, Mr. Holmes, I am going for a doctor
this very hour,' said I.  'Let it be Watson, then,' said he.  I
wouldn't waste an hour in coming to him, sir, or you may not see him
alive."

I was horrified for I had heard nothing of his illness.  I need not say
that I rushed for my coat and my hat.  As we drove back I asked for the
details.

"There is little I can tell you, sir.  He has been working at a case
down at Rotherhithe, in an alley near the river, and he has brought
this illness back with him.  He took to his bed on Wednesday afternoon
and has never moved since.  For these three days neither food nor drink
has passed his lips."

"Good God!  Why did you not call in a doctor?"

"He wouldn't have it, sir.  You know how masterful he is.  I didn't
dare to disobey him.  But he's not long for this world, as you'll see
for yourself the moment that you set eyes on him."

He was indeed a deplorable spectacle.  In the dim light of a foggy
November day the sick room was a gloomy spot, but it was that gaunt,
wasted face staring at me from the bed which sent a chill to my heart.
His eyes had the brightness of fever, there was a hectic flush upon
either cheek, and dark crusts clung to his lips; the thin hands upon
the coverlet twitched incessantly, his voice was croaking and
spasmodic.  He lay listlessly as I entered the room, but the sight of
me brought a gleam of recognition to his eyes.

"Well, Watson, we seem to have fallen upon evil days," said he in a
feeble voice, but with something of his old carelessness of manner.

"My dear fellow!" I cried, approaching him.

"Stand back!  Stand right back!" said he with the sharp imperiousness
which I had associated only with moments of crisis. "If you approach
me, Watson, I shall order you out of the house."

"But why?"

"Because it is my desire.  Is that not enough?"

Yes, Mrs. Hudson was right.  He was more masterful than ever.  It was
pitiful, however, to see his exhaustion.

"I only wished to help," I explained.

"Exactly!  You will help best by doing what you are told."

"Certainly, Holmes."

He relaxed the austerity of his manner.

"You are not angry?" he asked, gasping for breath.

Poor devil, how could I be angry when I saw him lying in such a plight
before me?

"It's for your own sake, Watson," he croaked.

"For MY sake?"

"I know what is the matter with me.  It is a coolie disease from
Sumatra--a thing that the Dutch know more about than we, though they
have made little of it up to date.  One thing only is certain.  It is
infallibly deadly, and it is horribly contagious."

He spoke now with a feverish energy, the long hands twitching and
jerking as he motioned me away.

"Contagious by touch, Watson--that's it, by touch.  Keep your distance
and all is well."

"Good heavens, Holmes!  Do you suppose that such a consideration weighs
with me of an instant?  It would not affect me in the case of a
stranger.  Do you imagine it would prevent me from doing my duty to so
old a friend?"

Again I advanced, but he repulsed me with a look of furious anger.

"If you will stand there I will talk.  If you do not you must leave the
room."

I have so deep a respect for the extraordinary qualities of Holmes that
I have always deferred to his wishes, even when I least understood
them.  But now all my professional instincts were aroused.  Let him be
my master elsewhere, I at least was his in a sick room.

"Holmes," said I, "you are not yourself.  A sick man is but a child,
and so I will treat you.  Whether you like it or not, I will examine
your symptoms and treat you for them."

He looked at me with venomous eyes.

"If I am to have a doctor whether I will or not, let me at least have
someone in whom I have confidence," said he.

"Then you have none in me?"

"In your friendship, certainly.  But facts are facts, Watson, and,
after all, you are only a general practitioner with very limited
experience and mediocre qualifications.  It is painful to have to say
these things, but you leave me no choice."

I was bitterly hurt.

"Such a remark is unworthy of you, Holmes.  It shows me very clearly
the state of your own nerves.  But if you have no confidence in me I
would not intrude my services.  Let me bring Sir Jasper Meek or Penrose
Fisher, or any of the best men in London.  But someone you MUST have,
and that is final.  If you think that I am going to stand here and see
you die without either helping you myself or bringing anyone else to
help you, then you have mistaken your man."

"You mean well, Watson," said the sick man with something between a sob
and a groan.  "Shall I demonstrate your own ignorance? What do you
know, pray, of Tapanuli fever?  What do you know of the black Formosa
corruption?"

"I have never heard of either."

"There are many problems of disease, many strange pathological
possibilities, in the East, Watson."  He paused after each sentence to
collect his failing strength.  "I have learned so much during some
recent researches which have a medico-criminal aspect.  It was in the
course of them that I contracted this complaint.  You can do nothing."

"Possibly not.  But I happen to know that Dr. Ainstree, the greatest
living authority upon tropical disease, is now in London.  All
remonstrance is useless, Holmes, I am going this instant to fetch him."
I turned resolutely to the door.

Never have I had such a shock!  In an instant, with a tiger-spring, the
dying man had intercepted me.  I heard the sharp snap of a twisted key.
The next moment he had staggered back to his bed, exhausted and panting
after his one tremendous outflame of energy.

"You won't take the key from me by force, Watson, I've got you, my
friend.  Here you are, and here you will stay until I will otherwise.
But I'll humour you."  (All this in little gasps, with terrible
struggles for breath between.)  "You've only my own good at heart.  Of
course I know that very well.  You shall have your way, but give me
time to get my strength.  Not now, Watson, not now.  It's four o'clock.
At six you can go."

"This is insanity, Holmes."

"Only two hours, Watson.  I promise you will go at six.  Are you
content to wait?"

"I seem to have no choice."

"None in the world, Watson.  Thank you, I need no help in arranging the
clothes.  You will please keep your distance.  Now, Watson, there is
one other condition that I would make.  You will seek help, not from
the man you mention, but from the one that I choose."

"By all means."

"The first three sensible words that you have uttered since you entered
this room, Watson.  You will find some books over there. I am somewhat
exhausted; I wonder how a battery feels when it pours electricity into
a non-conductor?  At six, Watson, we resume our conversation."

But it was destined to be resumed long before that hour, and in
circumstances which gave me a shock hardly second to that caused by his
spring to the door.  I had stood for some minutes looking at the silent
figure in the bed.  His face was almost covered by the clothes and he
appeared to be asleep.  Then, unable to settle down to reading, I
walked slowly round the room, examining the pictures of celebrated
criminals with which every wall was adorned.  Finally, in my aimless
perambulation, I came to the mantelpiece.  A litter of pipes,
tobacco-pouches, syringes, penknives, revolver-cartridges, and other
debris was scattered over it.  In the midst of these was a small black
and white ivory box with a sliding lid.  It was a neat little thing,
and I had stretched out my hand to examine it more closely, when----

It was a dreadful cry that he gave--a yell which might have been heard
down the street.  My skin went cold and my hair bristled at that
horrible scream.  As I turned I caught a glimpse of a convulsed face
and frantic eyes.  I stood paralyzed, with the little box in my hand.

"Put it down!  Down, this instant, Watson--this instant, I say!" His
head sank back upon the pillow and he gave a deep sigh of relief as I
replaced the box upon the mantelpiece.  "I hate to have my things
touched, Watson.  You know that I hate it.  You fidget me beyond
endurance. You, a doctor--you are enough to drive a patient into an
asylum.  Sit down, man, and let me have my rest!"

The incident left a most unpleasant impression upon my mind.  The
violent and causeless excitement, followed by this brutality of speech,
so far removed from his usual suavity, showed me how deep was the
disorganization of his mind.  Of all ruins, that of a noble mind is the
most deplorable.  I sat in silent dejection until the stipulated time
had passed.  He seemed to have been watching the clock as well as I,
for it was hardly six before he began to talk with the same feverish
animation as before.

"Now, Watson," said he.  "Have you any change in your pocket?"

"Yes."

"Any silver?"

"A good deal."

"How many half-crowns?"

"I have five."

"Ah, too few!  Too few!  How very unfortunate, Watson!  However, such
as they are you can put them in your watchpocket.  And all the rest of
your money in your left trouser pocket.  Thank you. It will balance you
so much better like that."

This was raving insanity.  He shuddered, and again made a sound between
a cough and a sob.

"You will now light the gas, Watson, but you will be very careful that
not for one instant shall it be more than half on.  I implore you to be
careful, Watson.  Thank you, that is excellent. No, you need not draw
the blind.  Now you will have the kindness to place some letters and
papers upon this table within my reach. Thank you.  Now some of that
litter from the mantelpiece. Excellent, Watson!  There is a sugar-tongs
there.  Kindly raise that small ivory box with its assistance.  Place
it here among the papers.  Good!  You can now go and fetch Mr.
Culverton Smith, of 13 Lower Burke Street."

To tell the truth, my desire to fetch a doctor had somewhat weakened,
for poor Holmes was so obviously delirious that it seemed dangerous to
leave him.  However, he was as eager now to consult the person named as
he had been obstinate in refusing.

"I never heard the name," said I.

"Possibly not, my good Watson.  It may surprise you to know that the
man upon earth who is best versed in this disease is not a medical man,
but a planter.  Mr. Culverton Smith is a well-known resident of
Sumatra, now visiting London.  An outbreak of the disease upon his
plantation, which was distant from medical aid, caused him to study it
himself, with some rather far-reaching consequences.  He is a very
methodical person, and I did not desire you to start before six,
because I was well aware that you would not find him in his study.  If
you could persuade him to come here and give us the benefit of his
unique experience of this disease, the investigation of which has been
his dearest hobby, I cannot doubt that he could help me."

I gave Holmes's remarks as a consecutive whole and will not attempt to
indicate how they were interrupted by gaspings for breath and those
clutchings of his hands which indicated the pain from which he was
suffering.  His appearance had changed for the worse during the few
hours that I had been with him.  Those hectic spots were more
pronounced, the eyes shone more brightly out of darker hollows, and a
cold sweat glimmered upon his brow. He still retained, however, the
jaunty gallantry of his speech. To the last gasp he would always be the
master.

"You will tell him exactly how you have left me," said he.  "You will
convey the very impression which is in your own mind--a dying man--a
dying and delirious man.  Indeed, I cannot think why the whole bed of
the ocean is not one solid mass of oysters, so prolific the creatures
seem.  Ah, I am wandering!  Strange how the brain controls the brain!
What was I saying, Watson?"

"My directions for Mr. Culverton Smith."

"Ah, yes, I remember.  My life depends upon it.  Plead with him,
Watson.  There is no good feeling between us.  His nephew, Watson--I
had suspicions of foul play and I allowed him to see it.  The boy died
horribly.  He has a grudge against me.  You will soften him, Watson.
Beg him, pray him, get him here by any means.  He can save me--only he!"

"I will bring him in a cab, if I have to carry him down to it."

"You will do nothing of the sort.  You will persuade him to come. And
then you will return in front of him.  Make any excuse so as not to
come with him.  Don't forget, Watson.  You won't fail me. You never did
fail me.  No doubt there are natural enemies which limit the increase
of the creatures.  You and I, Watson, we have done our part.  Shall the
world, then, be overrun by oysters? No, no; horrible!  You'll convey
all that is in your mind."

I left him full of the image of this magnificent intellect babbling
like a foolish child.  He had handed me the key, and with a happy
thought I took it with me lest he should lock himself in.  Mrs. Hudson
was waiting, trembling and weeping, in the passage.  Behind me as I
passed from the flat I heard Holmes's high, thin voice in some
delirious chant.  Below, as I stood whistling for a cab, a man came on
me through the fog.

"How is Mr. Holmes, sir?" he asked.

It was an old acquaintance, Inspector Morton, of Scotland Yard, dressed
in unofficial tweeds.

"He is very ill," I answered.

He looked at me in a most singular fashion.  Had it not been too
fiendish, I could have imagined that the gleam of the fanlight showed
exultation in his face.

"I heard some rumour of it," said he.

The cab had driven up, and I left him.

Lower Burke Street proved to be a line of fine houses lying in the
vague borderland between Notting Hill and Kensington.  The particular
one at which my cabman pulled up had an air of smug and demure
respectability in its old-fashioned iron railings, its massive
folding-door, and its shining brasswork.  All was in keeping with a
solemn butler who appeared framed in the pink radiance of a tinted
electrical light behind him.

"Yes, Mr. Culverton Smith is in.  Dr. Watson!  Very good, sir, I will
take up your card."

My humble name and title did not appear to impress Mr. Culverton Smith.
Through the half-open door I heard a high, petulant, penetrating voice.

"Who is this person?  What does he want?  Dear me, Staples, how often
have I said that I am not to be disturbed in my hours of study?"

There came a gentle flow of soothing explanation from the butler.

"Well, I won't see him, Staples.  I can't have my work interrupted like
this.  I am not at home.  Say so.  Tell him to come in the morning if
he really must see me."

Again the gentle murmur.

"Well, well, give him that message.  He can come in the morning, or he
can stay away.  My work must not be hindered."

I thought of Holmes tossing upon his bed of sickness and counting the
minutes, perhaps, until I could bring help to him.  It was not a time
to stand upon ceremony.  His life depended upon my promptness.  Before
the apologetic butler had delivered his message I had pushed past him
and was in the room.

With a shrill cry of anger a man rose from a reclining chair beside the
fire.  I saw a great yellow face, coarse-grained and greasy, with
heavy, double-chin, and two sullen, menacing gray eyes which glared at
me from under tufted and sandy brows.  A high bald head had a small
velvet smoking-cap poised coquettishly upon one side of its pink curve.
The skull was of enormous capacity, and yet as I looked down I saw to
my amazement that the figure of the man was small and frail, twisted in
the shoulders and back like one who has suffered from rickets in his
childhood.

"What's this?" he cried in a high, screaming voice.  "What is the
meaning of this intrusion?  Didn't I send you word that I would see you
to-morrow morning?"

"I am sorry," said I, "but the matter cannot be delayed.  Mr. Sherlock
Holmes--"

The mention of my friend's name had an extraordinary effect upon the
little man.  The look of anger passed in an instant from his face.  His
features became tense and alert.

"Have you come from Holmes?" he asked.

"I have just left him."

"What about Holmes?  How is he?"

"He is desperately ill.  That is why I have come."

The man motioned me to a chair, and turned to resume his own.  As he
did so I caught a glimpse of his face in the mirror over the
mantelpiece.  I could have sworn that it was set in a malicious and
abominable smile.  Yet I persuaded myself that it must have been some
nervous contraction which I had surprised, for he turned to me an
instant later with genuine concern upon his features.

"I am sorry to hear this," said he.  "I only know Mr. Holmes through
some business dealings which we have had, but I have every respect for
his talents and his character.  He is an amateur of crime, as I am of
disease.  For him the villain, for me the microbe. There are my
prisons," he continued, pointing to a row of bottles and jars which
stood upon a side table. "Among those gelatine cultivations some of the
very worst offenders in the world are now doing time."

"It was on account of your special knowledge that Mr. Holmes desired to
see you.  He has a high opinion of you and thought that you were the
one man in London who could help him."

The little man started, and the jaunty smoking-cap slid to the floor.

"Why?" he asked.  "Why should Mr. Homes think that I could help him in
his trouble?"

"Because of your knowledge of Eastern diseases."

"But why should he think that this disease which he has contracted is
Eastern?"

"Because, in some professional inquiry, he has been working among
Chinese sailors down in the docks."

Mr. Culverton Smith smiled pleasantly and picked up his smoking-cap.

"Oh, that's it--is it?" said he.  "I trust the matter is not so grave
as you suppose.  How long has he been ill?"

"About three days."

"Is he delirious?"

"Occasionally."

"Tut, tut!  This sounds serious.  It would be inhuman not to answer his
call.  I very much resent any interruption to my work, Dr. Watson, but
this case is certainly exceptional.  I will come with you at once."

I remembered Holmes's injunction.

"I have another appointment," said I.

"Very good.  I will go alone.  I have a note of Mr. Holmes's address.
You can rely upon my being there within half an hour at most."

It was with a sinking heart that I reentered Holmes's bedroom. For all
that I knew the worst might have happened in my absence. To my enormous
relief,  he had improved greatly in the interval. His appearance was as
ghastly as ever, but all trace of delirium had left him and he spoke in
a feeble voice, it is true, but with even more than his usual crispness
and lucidity.

"Well, did you see him, Watson?"

"Yes; he is coming."

"Admirable, Watson!  Admirable!  You are the best of messengers."

"He wished to return with me."

"That would never do, Watson.  That would be obviously impossible.  Did
he ask what ailed me?"

"I told him about the Chinese in the East End."

"Exactly!  Well, Watson, you have done all that a good friend could.
You can now disappear from the scene."

"I must wait and hear his opinion, Holmes."

"Of course you must.  But I have reasons to suppose that this opinion
would be very much more frank and valuable if he imagines that we are
alone.  There is just room behind the head of my bed, Watson."

"My dear Holmes!"

"I fear there is no alternative, Watson.  The room does not lend itself
to concealment, which is as well, as it is the less likely to arouse
suspicion.  But just there, Watson, I fancy that it could be done."
Suddenly he sat up with a rigid intentness upon his haggard face.
"There are the wheels, Watson.  Quick, man, if you love me!  And don't
budge, whatever happens--whatever happens, do you hear?  Don't speak!
Don't move!  Just listen with all your ears."  Then in an instant his
sudden access of strength departed, and his masterful, purposeful talk
droned away into the low, vague murmurings of a semi-delirious man.

From the hiding-place into which I had been so swiftly hustled I heard
the footfalls upon the stair, with the opening and the closing of the
bedroom door.  Then, to my surprise, there came a long silence, broken
only by the heavy breathings and gaspings of the sick man.  I could
imagine that our visitor was standing by the bedside and looking down
at the sufferer.  At last that strange hush was broken.

"Holmes!" he cried.  "Holmes!" in the insistent tone of one who awakens
a sleeper.  "Can't you hear me, Holmes?"  There was a rustling, as if
he had shaken the sick man roughly by the shoulder.

"Is that you, Mr. Smith?"  Holmes whispered.  "I hardly dared hope that
you would come."

The other laughed.

"I should imagine not," he said.  "And yet, you see, I am here. Coals
of fire, Holmes--coals of fire!"

"It is very good of you--very noble of you.  I appreciate your special
knowledge."

Our visitor sniggered.

"You do.  You are, fortunately, the only man in London who does. Do you
know what is the matter with you?"

"The same," said Holmes.

"Ah!  You recognize the symptoms?"

"Only too well."

"Well, I shouldn't be surprised, Holmes.  I shouldn't be surprised if
it WERE the same.  A bad lookout for you if it is. Poor Victor was a
dead man on the fourth day--a strong, hearty young fellow.  It was
certainly, as you said, very surprising that he should have contracted
an out-of-the-way Asiatic disease in the heart of London--a disease,
too, of which I had made such a very special study.  Singular
coincidence, Holmes.  Very smart of you to notice it, but rather
uncharitable to suggest that it was cause and effect."

"I knew that you did it."

"Oh, you did, did you?  Well, you couldn't prove it, anyhow.  But what
do you think of yourself spreading reports about me like that, and then
crawling to me for help the moment you are in trouble?  What sort of a
game is that--eh?"

I heard the rasping, laboured breathing of the sick man.  "Give me the
water!" he gasped.

"You're precious near your end, my friend, but I don't want you to go
till I have had a word with you.  That's why I give you water.  There,
don't slop it about!  That's right.  Can you understand what I say?"

Holmes groaned.

"Do what you can for me.  Let bygones be bygones," he whispered. "I'll
put the words out of my head--I swear I will.  Only cure me, and I'll
forget it."

"Forget what?"

"Well, about Victor Savage's death.  You as good as admitted just now
that you had done it.  I'll forget it."

"You can forget it or remember it, just as you like.  I don't see you
in the witnessbox.  Quite another shaped box, my good Holmes, I assure
you.  It matters nothing to me that you should know how my nephew died.
It's not him we are talking about.  It's you."

"Yes, yes."

"The fellow who came for me--I've forgotten his name--said that you
contracted it down in the East End among the sailors."

"I could only account for it so."

"You are proud of your brains, Holmes, are you not?  Think yourself
smart, don't you?  You came across someone who was smarter this time.
Now cast your mind back, Holmes.  Can you think of no other way you
could have got this thing?"

"I can't think.  My mind is gone.  For heaven's sake help me!"

"Yes, I will help you.  I'll help you to understand just where you are
and how you got there.  I'd like you to know before you die."

"Give me something to ease my pain."

"Painful, is it?  Yes, the coolies used to do some squealing towards
the end.  Takes you as cramp, I fancy."

"Yes, yes; it is cramp."

"Well, you can hear what I say, anyhow.  Listen now!  Can you remember
any unusual incident in your life just about the time your symptoms
began?"

"No, no; nothing."

"Think again."

"I'm too ill to think."

"Well, then, I'll help you.  Did anything come by post?"

"By post?"

"A box by chance?"

"I'm fainting--I'm gone!"

"Listen, Holmes!"  There was a sound as if he was shaking the dying
man, and it was all that I could do to hold myself quiet in my
hiding-place.  "You must hear me.  You SHALL hear me.  Do you remember
a box--an ivory box?  It came on Wednesday.  You opened it--do you
remember?"

"Yes, yes, I opened it.  There was a sharp spring inside it. Some
joke--"

"It was no joke, as you will find to your cost.  You fool, you would
have it and you have got it.  Who asked you to cross my path?  If you
had left me alone I would not have hurt you."

"I remember," Holmes gasped.  "The spring!  It drew blood.  This
box--this on the table."

"The very one, by George!  And it may as well leave the room in my
pocket.  There goes your last shred of evidence.  But you have the
truth now, Holmes, and you can die with the knowledge that I killed
you.  You knew too much of the fate of Victor Savage, so I have sent
you to share it.  You are very near your end, Holmes. I will sit here
and I will watch you die."

Holmes's voice had sunk to an almost inaudible whisper.

"What is that?" said Smith.  "Turn up the gas?  Ah, the shadows begin
to fall, do they?  Yes, I will turn it up, that I may see you the
better." He crossed the room and the light suddenly brightened.  "Is
there any other little service that I can do you, my friend?"

"A match and a cigarette."

I nearly called out in my joy and my amazement.  He was speaking in his
natural voice--a little weak, perhaps, but the very voice I knew.
There was a long pause, and I felt that Culverton Smith was standing in
silent amazement looking down at his companion.

"What's the meaning of this?" I heard him say at last in a dry, rasping
tone.

"The best way of successfully acting a part is to be it," said Holmes.
"I give you my word that for three days I have tasted neither food nor
drink until you were good enough to pour me out that glass of water.
But it is the tobacco which I find most irksome.  Ah, here ARE some
cigarettes."  I heard the striking of a match.  "That is very much
better.  Halloa! halloa!  Do I hear the step of a friend?"

There were footfalls outside, the door opened, and Inspector Morton
appeared.

"All is in order and this is your man," said Holmes.

The officer gave the usual cautions.

"I arrest you on the charge of the murder of one Victor Savage," he
concluded.

"And you might add of the attempted murder of one Sherlock Holmes,"
remarked my friend with a chuckle.  "To save an invalid trouble,
Inspector, Mr. Culverton Smith was good enough to give our signal by
turning up the gas.  By the way, the prisoner has a small box in the
right-hand pocket of his coat which it would be as well to remove.
Thank you.  I would handle it gingerly if I were you.  Put it down
here. It may play its part in the trial."

There was a sudden rush and a scuffle, followed by the clash of iron
and a cry of pain.

"You'll only get yourself hurt," said the inspector.  "Stand still,
will you?"  There was the click of the closing handcuffs.

"A nice trap!" cried the high, snarling voice.  "It will bring YOU into
the dock, Holmes, not me.  He asked me to come here to cure him.  I was
sorry for him and I came.  Now he will pretend, no doubt, that I have
said anything which he may invent which will corroborate his insane
suspicions. You can lie as you like, Holmes.  My word is always as good
as yours."

"Good heavens!" cried Holmes.  "I had totally forgotten him.  My dear
Watson, I owe you a thousand apologies.  To think that I should have
overlooked you!  I need not introduce you to Mr. Culverton Smith, since
I understand that you met somewhat earlier in the evening. Have you the
cab below?  I will follow you when I am dressed, for I may be of some
use at the station.

"I never needed it more," said Holmes as he refreshed himself with a
glass of claret and some biscuits in the intervals of his toilet.
"However, as you know, my habits are irregular, and such a feat means
less to me than to most men.  It was very essential that I should
impress Mrs. Hudson with the reality of my condition, since she was to
convey it to you, and you in turn to him.  You won't be offended,
Watson?  You will realize that among your many talents dissimulation
finds no place, and that if you had shared my secret you would never
have been able to impress Smith with the urgent necessity of his
presence, which was the vital point of the whole scheme.  Knowing his
vindictive nature, I was perfectly certain that he would come to look
upon his handiwork."

"But your appearance, Holmes--your ghastly face?"

"Three days of absolute fast does not improve one's beauty, Watson.
For the rest, there is nothing which a sponge may not cure.  With
vaseline upon one's forehead, belladonna in one's eyes, rouge over the
cheek-bones, and crusts of beeswax round one's lips, a very satisfying
effect can be produced. Malingering is a subject upon which I have
sometimes thought of writing a monograph.  A little occasional talk
about half-crowns, oysters, or any other extraneous subject produces a
pleasing effect of delirium."

"But why would you not let me near you, since there was in truth no
infection?"

"Can you ask, my dear Watson?  Do you imagine that I have no respect
for your medical talents?  Could I fancy that your astute judgment
would pass a dying man who, however weak, had no rise of pulse or
temperature?  At four yards, I could deceive you.  If I failed to do
so, who would bring my Smith within my grasp?  No, Watson, I would not
touch that box.  You can just see if you look at it sideways where the
sharp spring like a viper's tooth emerges as you open it.  I dare say
it was by some such device that poor Savage, who stood between this
monster and a reversion, was done to death.  My correspondence,
however, is, as you know, a varied one, and I am somewhat upon my guard
against any packages which reach me.  It was clear to me, however, that
by pretending that he had really succeeded in his design I might
surprise a confession.  That pretence I have carried out with the
thoroughness of the true artist.  Thank you, Watson, you must help me
on with my coat.  When we have finished at the police-station I think
that something nutritious at Simpson's would not be out of place."

THE REFUGEES

A TALE OF TWO CONTINENTS

A. CONAN DOYLE







CONTENTS.


PART I.

IN THE OLD WORLD.

Chapter

      I.    THE MAN FROM AMERICA.

     II.    A MONARCH IN DESHABILLE

    III.    THE HOLDING OF THE DOOR

     IV.    THE FATHER OF HIS PEOPLE

      V.    CHILDREN OF BELIAL

     VI.    A HOUSE OF STRIFE

    VII.    THE NEW WORLD AND THE OLD

   VIII.    THE RISING SUN

     IX.    LE ROI S'AMUSE

      X.    AN ECLIPSE AT VERSAILLES

     XI.    THE SUN REAPPEARS

    XII.    THE KING RECEIVES

   XIII.    THE KING HAS IDEAS

    XIV.    THE LAST CARD

     XV.    THE MIDNIGHT MISSION

    XVI.    "WHEN THE DEVIL DRIVES"

   XVII.    THE DUNGEON OF PORTILLAC

  XVIII.    A NIGHT OF SURPRISES

    XIX.    IN THE KING'S CABINET

     XX.    THE TWO FRANCOISES

    XXI.    THE MAN IN THE CALECHE

   XXII.    THE SCAFFOLD OF PORTILLAC

  XXIII.    THE FALL OF THE CATINATS



PART II.

IN THE NEW WORLD.

Chapter

   XXIV.    THE START OF THE "GOLDEN ROD"

    XXV.    A BOAT OF THE DEAD

   XXVI.    THE LAST PORT

  XXVII.    A DWINDLING ISLAND

 XXVIII.    IN THE POOL OF QUEBEC

   XXIX.    THE VOICE AT THE PORT-HOLE

    XXX.    THE INLAND WATERS

   XXXI.    THE HAIRLESS MAN

  XXXII.    THE LORD OF SAINTE MARIE

 XXXIII.    THE SLAYING OF BROWN MOOSE

  XXXIV.    THE MEN OF BLOOD

   XXXV.    THE TAPPING OF DEATH

  XXXVI.    THE TAKING OF THE STOCKADE

 XXXVII.    THE COMING OF THE FRIAR

XXXVIII.    THE DINING-HALL OF SAINTE MARIE

  XXXIX.    THE TWO SWIMMERS

     XL.    THE END


NOTE ON THE HUEGENOTS AND THEIR DISPERSION

NOTE ON THE FUTURE OF LOUIS, MADAME DE MAINTENON, AND MADAME DE MONTESPAN





CHAPTER I.


THE MAN FROM AMERICA.

It was the sort of window which was common in Paris about the end of the
seventeenth century.  It was high, mullioned, with a broad transom
across the centre, and above the middle of the transom a tiny coat of
arms--three caltrops gules upon a field argent--let into the
diamond-paned glass.  Outside there projected a stout iron rod, from
which hung a gilded miniature of a bale of wool which swung and squeaked
with every puff of wind.  Beyond that again were the houses of the other
side, high, narrow, and prim, slashed with diagonal wood-work in front,
and topped with a bristle of sharp gables and corner turrets.  Between
were the cobble-stones of the Rue St. Martin and the clatter of
innumerable feet.

Inside, the window was furnished with a broad bancal of brown stamped
Spanish leather, where the family might recline and have an eye from
behind the curtains on all that was going forward in the busy world
beneath  them.  Two of them sat there now, a man and a woman, but their
backs were turned to the spectacle, and their faces to the large and
richly furnished room.  From time to time they stole a glance at each
other, and their eyes told that they needed no other sight to make them
happy.

Nor was it to be wondered at, for they were a well-favoured pair.
She was very young, twenty at the most, with a face which was pale,
indeed, and yet of a brilliant pallor, which was so clear and fresh, and
carried with it such a suggestion of purity and innocence, that one
would not wish its maiden grace to be marred by an intrusion of colour.
Her features were delicate and sweet, and her blue-black hair and long
dark eyelashes formed a piquant contrast to her dreamy gray eyes and her
ivory skin.  In her whole expression there was something quiet and
subdued, which was accentuated by her simple dress of black taffeta, and
by the little jet brooch and bracelet which were her sole ornaments.
Such was Adele Catinat, the only daughter of the famous Huguenot
cloth-merchant.

But if her dress was sombre, it was atoned for by the magnificence of
her companion.  He was a man who might have been ten years her senior,
with a keen soldier face, small well-marked features, a carefully
trimmed black moustache, and a dark hazel eye which might harden to
command a man, or soften to supplicate a woman, and be successful at
either.  His coat was of sky-blue, slashed across with silver braidings,
and with broad silver shoulder-straps on either side.  A vest of white
calamanca peeped out from beneath it, and knee-breeches of the same
disappeared into high polished boots with gilt spurs upon the heels.
A silver-hilted rapier and a plumed cap lying upon a settle beside him
completed a costume which was a badge of honour to the wearer, for any
Frenchman would have recognised it as being that of an officer in the
famous Blue Guard of Louis the Fourteenth.  A trim, dashing soldier he
looked, with his curling black hair and well-poised head.  Such he had
proved himself before now in the field, too, until the name of Amory de
Catinat had become conspicuous among the thousands of the valiant lesser
_noblesse_ who had flocked into the service of the king.

They were first cousins, these two, and there was just sufficient
resemblance in the clear-cut features to recall the relationship.
De Catinat was sprung from a noble Huguenot family, but having lost his
parents early he had joined the army, and had worked his way without
influence and against all odds to his present position.  His father's
younger brother, however, finding every path to fortune barred to him
through the persecution to which men of his faith were already
subjected, had dropped the "de" which implied his noble descent, and he
had taken to trade in the city of Paris, with such success that he was
now one of the richest and most prominent citizens of the town.  It was
under his roof that the guardsman now sat, and it was his only daughter
whose white hand he held in his own.

"Tell me, Adele," said he, "why do you look troubled?"

"I am not troubled, Amory,"

"Come, there is just one little line between those curving brows.  Ah, I
can read you, you see, as a shepherd reads the sky."

"It is nothing, Amory, but--"

"But what?"

"You leave me this evening."

"But only to return to-morrow."

"And must you really, really go to-night?"

"It would be as much as my commission is worth to be absent.  Why, I am
on duty to-morrow morning outside the king's bedroom! After chapel-time
Major de Brissac will take my place, and then I am free once more."

"Ah, Amory, when you talk of the king and the court and the grand
ladies, you fill me with wonder."

"And why with wonder?"

"To think that you who live amid such splendour should stoop to the
humble room of a mercer."

"Ah, but what does the room contain?"

"There is the greatest wonder of all.  That you who pass your days amid
such people, so beautiful, so witty, should think me worthy of your
love, me, who am such a quiet little mouse, all alone in this great
house, so shy and so backward!  It is wonderful!"

"Every man has his own taste," said her cousin, stroking the tiny hand.
"It is with women as with flowers.  Some may prefer the great brilliant
sunflower, or the rose, which is so bright and large that it must ever
catch the eye.  But give me the little violet which hides among the
mosses, and yet is so sweet to look upon, and sheds its fragrance round
it.  But still that line upon your brow, dearest."

"I was wishing that father would return."

"And why?  Are you so lonely, then?"

Her pale face lit up with a quick smile.  "I shall not be lonely until
to-night.  But I am always uneasy when he is away.  One hears so much
now of the persecution of our poor brethren."

"Tut! my uncle can defy them."

"He has gone to the provost of the Mercer Guild about this notice of the
quartering of the dragoons."

"Ah, you have not told me of that."

"Here it is." She rose and took up a slip of blue paper with a red seal
dangling from it which lay upon the table.  His strong, black brows
knitted together as he glanced at it.

"Take notice," it ran, "that you, Theophile Catinat, cloth-mercer of
the Rue St. Martin, are hereby required to give shelter and rations to
twenty men of the Languedoc Blue Dragoons under Captain Dalbert, until
such time as you receive a further notice.  [Signed] De Beaupre
(Commissioner of the King)."

De Catinat knew well how this method of annoying Huguenots had been
practised all over France, but he had flattered himself that his own
position at court would have insured his kinsman from such an outrage.
He threw the paper down with an exclamation of anger.

"When do they come?"

"Father said to-night."

"Then they shall not be here long.  To-morrow I shall have an order to
remove them.  But the sun has sunk behind St. Martin's Church, and I
should already be upon my way."

"No, no; you must not go yet."

"I would that I could give you into your father's charge first, for I
fear to leave you alone when these troopers may come.  And yet no excuse
will avail me if I am not at Versailles.  But see, a horseman has
stopped before the door.  He is not in uniform.  Perhaps he is a
messenger from your father."

The girl ran eagerly to the window, and peered out, with her hand
resting upon her cousin's silver-corded shoulder.

"Ah!" she cried, "I had forgotten.  It is the man from America.
Father said that he would come to-day."

"The man from America!" repeated the soldier, in a tone of surprise, and
they both craned their necks from the window.  The horseman, a sturdy,
broad-shouldered young man, clean-shaven and crop-haired, turned his
long, swarthy face and his bold features in  their direction as he ran
his eyes over the front of the  house.  He had a soft-brimmed gray hat
of a shape which was strange to Parisian eyes, but his sombre clothes
and high boots were such as any citizen might have worn.  Yet his
general appearance was so unusual that a group of townsfolk had already
assembled round him, staring with open mouth at his horse and himself.
A battered gun with an extremely long barrel was fastened by the stock
to his stirrup, while the muzzle stuck up into the air behind him.
At each holster was a large dangling black bag, and a gaily coloured
red-slashed blanket was rolled up at the back of his saddle.  His horse,
a strong-limbed dapple-gray, all shiny with sweat above, and all caked
with mud beneath, bent its fore knees as it stood, as though it were
overspent.  The rider, however, having satisfied himself as to the
house, sprang lightly out of his saddle, and disengaging his gun, his
blanket, and his bags, pushed his way unconcernedly through the gaping
crowd and knocked loudly at the door.

"Who is he, then?" asked De Catinat.  "A Canadian?  I am almost one
myself.  I had as many friends on one side of the sea as on the other.
Perchance I know him.  There are not so many white faces yonder, and in
two years there was scarce one from the Saguenay to Nipissing that I had
not seen."

"Nay, he is from the English provinces, Amory.  But he speaks our
tongue.  His mother was of our blood."

"And his name?"

"Is Amos--Amos--ah, those names!  Yes, Green, that was it--Amos Green.
His father and mine have done much trade together, and now his son, who,
as I understand, has lived ever in the woods, is sent here to see
something of men and cities.  Ah, my God! what can have happened now?"

A sudden chorus of screams and cries had broken out from the passage
beneath, with the shouting of a man and the sound of rushing steps.
In an instant De Catinat was half-way down the stairs, and was staring
in amazement at the scene in the hall beneath.

Two maids stood, screaming at the pitch of their lungs, at either side.
In the centre the aged man-servant Pierre, a stern old Calvinist, whose
dignity had never before been shaken, was spinning round, waving his
arms, and roaring so that he might have been heard at the Louvre.
Attached to the gray worsted stocking which covered his fleshless calf
was a fluffy black hairy ball, with one little red eye glancing up, and
the gleam of two white teeth where it held its grip.  At the shrieks,
the young stranger, who had gone out to his horse, came rushing back,
and plucking the creature off, he slapped it twice across the snout, and
plunged it head-foremost back into the leather bag from which it had
emerged.

"It is nothing," said he, speaking in excellent French; "it is only a
bear."

"Ah, my God!" cried Pierre, wiping the drops from his brow.  "Ah, it has
aged me five years!  I was at the door, bowing to monsieur, and in a
moment it had me from behind."

"It was my fault for leaving the bag loose.  The creature was but pupped
the day we left New York, six weeks come Tuesday.  Do I speak with my
father's friend, Monsieur Catinat?"

"No, monsieur," said the guardsman, from the staircase.  "My uncle is
out, but I am Captain de Catinat, at your service, and here is
Mademoiselle Catinat, who is your hostess."

The stranger ascended the stair, and paid his greetings to them both
with the air of a man who was as shy as a wild deer, and yet who had
steeled himself to carry a thing through.  He walked with them to the
sitting-room, and then in an instant was gone again, and they heard his
feet thudding upon the stairs.  Presently he was back, with a lovely
glossy skin in his hands.  "The bear is for your father, mademoiselle,"
said he.  "This little skin I have brought from America for you.  It is
but a trifle, and yet it may serve to make a pair of mocassins or a
pouch."

Adele gave a cry of delight as her hands sank into the depths of its
softness.  She might well admire it, for no king in the world could have
had a finer skin.  "Ah, it is beautiful, monsieur," she cried; "and what
creature is it? and where did it come from?"

"It is a black fox.  I shot it myself last fall up near the Iroquois
villages at Lake Oneida."

She pressed it to her cheek, her white face showing up like marble
against its absolute blackness.  "I am sorry my father is not here to
welcome you, monsieur," she said; "but I do so very heartily in his
place.  Your room is above.  Pierre will show you to it, if you wish."

"My room? For what?"

"Why, monsieur, to sleep in!"

"And must I sleep in a room?"

De Catinat laughed at the gloomy face of the American.

"You shall not sleep there if you do not wish," said he.

The other brightened at once and stepped across to the further window,
which looked down upon the court-yard.  "Ah," he cried.  "There is a
beech-tree there, mademoiselle, and if I might take my blanket out
yonder, I should like it better than any room.  In winter, indeed, one
must do it, but in summer I am smothered with a ceiling pressing down
upon me."

"You are not from a town then?" said De Catinat.

"My father lives in New York--two doors from the house of Peter
Stuyvesant, of whom you must have heard.  He is a very hardy man, and he
can do it, but I--even a few days of Albany or of Schenectady are enough
for me.  My life has been in the woods."

"I am sure my father would wish you to sleep where you like and to do
what you like, as long as it makes you happy."

"I thank you, mademoiselle.  Then I shall take my things out there, and
I shall groom my horse."

"Nay, there is Pierre."

"I am used to doing it myself."

"Then I will come with you," said De Catinat, "for I would have a word
with you.  Until to-morrow, then, Adele, farewell!"

"Until to-morrow, Amory."

The two young men passed downstairs together, and the guardsman followed
the American out into the yard.

"You have had a long journey," he said.

"Yes; from Rouen."

"Are you tired?"

"No; I am seldom tired."

"Remain with the lady, then, until her father comes back."

"Why do you say that?"

"Because I have to go, and she might need a protector."

The stranger said nothing, but he nodded, and throwing off his black
coat, set to work vigorously rubbing down his travel-stained horse.



CHAPTER II.


A MONARCH IN DESHABILLE.

It was the morning after the guardsman had returned to his duties.
Eight o'clock had struck on the great clock of Versailles, and it was
almost time for the monarch to rise.  Through all the long corridors and
frescoed passages of the monster palace there was a subdued hum and
rustle, with a low muffled stir of preparation, for the rising of the
king was a great state function in which many had a part to play.
A servant with a steaming silver saucer hurried past, bearing it to
Monsieur de St. Quentin, the state barber.  Others, with clothes thrown
over their arms, bustled down the passage which led to the ante-chamber.
The knot of guardsmen in their gorgeous blue and silver coats
straightened themselves up and brought their halberds to attention,
while the young officer, who had been looking wistfully out of the
window at some courtiers who were laughing and chatting on the terraces,
turned sharply upon his heel, and strode over to the white and gold door
of the royal bedroom.

He had hardly taken his stand there before the handle was very gently
turned from within, the door revolved noiselessly upon its hinges, and a
man slid silently through the aperture, closing it again behind him.

"Hush!" said he, with his finger to his thin, precise lips, while his
whole clean-shaven face and high-arched brows were an entreaty and a
warning.  "The king  still sleeps."

The words were whispered from one to another among the group who had
assembled outside the door.  The speaker, who was Monsieur Bontems, head
_valet de Chambre_, gave a sign to the officer of the guard, and led him
into the window alcove from which he had lately come.

"Good-morning, Captain de Catinat," said he, with a mixture of
familiarity and respect in his manner.

"Good-morning, Bontems.  How has the king slept?"

"Admirably."

"But it is his time."

"Hardly."

"You will not rouse him yet?"

"In seven and a half minutes." The valet pulled out the little round
watch which gave the law to the man who _was_ the law to twenty millions
of people.

"Who commands at the main guard?"

"Major de Brissac."

"And you will be here?"

"For four hours I attend the king."

"Very good.  He gave me some instructions for the officer of the guard,
when he was alone last night after the _petit coucher_.  He bade me to
say that Monsieur de Vivonne was not to be admitted to the _grand
lever_.  You are to tell him so."

"I shall do so."

"Then, should a note come from _her_--you understand me, the new one--"

"Madame de Maintenon?"

"Precisely.  But it is more discreet not to mention names.  Should she
send a note, you will take it and deliver it quietly when the king gives
you an opportunity."

"It shall be done."

"But if the other should come, as is possible enough--the other, you
understand me, the former--"

"Madame de Montespan."

"Ah, that soldierly tongue of yours, captain! Should she come, I say,
you will gently bar her way, with courteous words, you understand, but
on no account is she to be permitted to enter the royal room."

"Very good, Bontems."

"And now we have but three minutes."

He strode through the rapidly increasing group of people in the corridor
with an air of proud humility as befitted a man who, if he was a valet,
was at least the king of valets, by being the valet of the king.  Close
by the door stood a line of footmen, resplendent in their powdered wigs,
red plush coats, and silver shoulder knots.

"Is the officer of the oven here?" asked Bontems.

"Yes, sir," replied a functionary who bore in front of him an enamelled
tray heaped with pine shavings.

"The opener of the shutters?"

"Here, sir."

"The remover of the taper?"

"Here, sir."

"Be ready for the word." He turned the handle once more, and slipped
into the darkened room.

It was a large square apartment, with two high windows upon the further
side, curtained across with priceless velvet hangings.  Through the
chinks the morning sun shot a few little gleams, which widened as they
crossed the room to break in bright blurs of light upon the
primrose-tinted wall.  A large arm-chair stood by the side of the
burnt-out fire, shadowed over by the huge marble mantel-piece, the back
of which was carried up twining and curving into a thousand arabesque
and armorial devices until it blended with the richly painted ceiling.
In one corner a narrow couch with a rug thrown across it showed where
the faithful Bontems had spent the night.

In the very centre of the chamber there stood a large four-post bed,
with curtains of Gobelin tapestry looped back from the pillow.  A square
of polished rails surrounded it, leaving a space some five feet in width
all round between the enclosure and the bedside.  Within this enclosure,
or _ruelle_, stood a small round table, covered over with a white
napkin, upon which lay a silver platter and an enamelled cup, the one
containing a little Frontiniac wine and water, the other bearing three
slices of the breast of a chicken, in case the king should hunger during
the night.

As Bontems passed noiselessly across the room, his feet sinking into the
moss-like carpet, there was the heavy close smell of sleep in the air,
and he could near the long thin breathing of the sleeper.  He passed
through the opening in the rails, and stood, watch in hand, waiting for
the exact instant when the iron routine of the court demanded that the
monarch should be roused.  Beneath him, from under the costly green
coverlet of Oriental silk, half buried in the fluffy Valenciennes lace
which edged the pillow, there protruded a round black bristle of
close-cropped hair, with the profile of a curving nose and petulant lip
outlined against the white background.  The valet snapped his watch, and
bent over the sleeper.

"I have the honour to inform your Majesty that it is half-past eight,"
said he.

"Ah!" The king slowly opened his large dark-brown eyes, made the sign of
the cross, and kissed a little dark reliquary which he drew from under
his night-dress.  Then he sat up in bed, and blinked about him with the
air of a man who is collecting his thoughts.

"Did you give my orders to the officer of the guard, Bontems?" he asked.

"Yes, sire."

"Who is on duty?"

"Major de Brissac at the main guard, and Captain de Catinat in the
corridor."

"De Catinat!  Ah, the young man who stopped my horse at Fontainebleau.
I remember him.  You may give the signal, Bontems."

The chief valet walked swiftly across to the door and threw it open.  In
rushed the officer of the ovens and the four red-coated, white-wigged
footmen, ready-handed, silent-footed, each intent upon his own duties.
The one seized upon Bontem's rug and couch, and in an instant had
whipped them off into an ante-chamber, another had carried away the
_en cas_ meal and the silver taper-stand; while a third drew back the
great curtains of stamped velvet and let a flood of light into the
apartment.  Then, as the flames were already flickering among the pine
shavings in the fireplace, the officer of the ovens placed two round
logs crosswise above them, for the morning air was chilly, and withdrew
with his fellow-servants.

They were hardly gone before a more august group entered the
bed-chamber.  Two walked together in front, the one a youth little over
twenty years of age, middle-sized, inclining to stoutness, with a slow,
pompous bearing, a well-turned leg, and a face which was comely enough
in a mask-like fashion, but which was devoid of any shadow of
expression, except perhaps of an occasional lurking gleam of mischievous
humour.  He was richly clad in plum-coloured velvet, with a broad band
of blue silk; across his breast, and the glittering edge of the order of
St. Louis protruding from under it.  His companion was a man of forty,
swarthy, dignified, and solemn, in a plain but rich dress of black silk,
with slashes of gold at the neck and sleeves.  As the pair faced the
king there was sufficient resemblance between the three faces to show
that they were of one blood, and to enable a stranger to guess that the
older was Monsieur, the younger brother of the king, while the other was
Louis the Dauphin, his only legitimate child, and heir to a throne to
which in the strange workings of Providence neither he nor his sons were
destined to ascend.

Strong as was the likeness between the three faces, each with the
curving Bourbon nose, the large full eye, and the thick Hapsburg
under-lip, their common heritage from Anne of Austria, there was still a
vast difference of temperament and character stamped upon their
features.  The king was now in his six-and-fortieth year, and the
cropped black head was already thinning a little on the top, and shading
away to gray over the temples.  He still, however, retained much of the
beauty of his youth, tempered by the dignity and sternness which
increased with his years.  His dark eyes were full of expression, and
his clear-cut features were the delight of the sculptor and the painter.
His firm and yet sensitive mouth and his thick, well-arched brows gave
an air of authority and power to his face, while the more subdued
expression which was habitual to his brother marked the man whose whole
life had been spent in one long exercise of deference and
self-effacement.  The dauphin, on the other hand, with a more regular
face than his father, had none of that quick play of feature when
excited, or that kingly serenity when composed, which had made a shrewd
observer say that Louis, if he were not the greatest monarch that ever
lived, was at least the best fitted to act the part.

Behind the king's son and the king's brother there entered a little
group of notables and of officials whom duty had called to this daily
ceremony.  There was the grand master of the robes, the first lord of
the bed-chamber, the Duc du Maine, a pale youth clad in black velvet,
limping heavily with his left leg, and his little brother, the young
Comte de Toulouse, both of them the illegitimate sons of Madame de
Montespan and the king.  Behind them, again, was the first valet of the
wardrobe, followed by Fagon, the first physician, Telier, the head
surgeon, and three pages in scarlet and gold who bore the royal clothes.
Such were the partakers in the family entry, the highest honour which
the court of France could aspire to.

Bontems had poured on the king's hands a few drops of spirits of wine,
catching them again in a silver dish; and the first lord of the
bedchamber had presented the bowl of holy water with which he made the
sign of the cross, muttering to himself the short office of the Holy
Ghost.  Then, with a nod to his brother and a short word of greeting to
the dauphin and to the Due du Maine, he swung his legs over the side of
the bed and sat in his long silken night-dress, his little white feet
dangling from beneath it--a perilous position for any man to assume,
were it not that he had so heart-felt a sense of his own dignity that he
could not realise that under any circumstances it might be compromised
in the eyes of others.  So he sat, the master of France, yet the slave
to every puff of wind, for a wandering draught had set him shivering and
shaking.  Monsieur  de St. Quentin, the noble barber, flung a purple
dressing-gown over the royal shoulders, and placed a long many-curled
court wig upon his head, while Bontems drew on his red stockings and
laid before him his slippers of embroidered velvet.  The monarch thrust
his feet into them, tied his dressing-gown, and passed out to the
fireplace, where he settled himself down in his easy-chair, holding out
his thin delicate hands towards the blazing logs, while the others stood
round in a semicircle, waiting for the _grand lever_ which was to
follow.

"How is this, messieurs?" the king asked suddenly, glancing round him
with a petulant face.  "I am conscious of a smell of scent.  Surely none
of you would venture to bring perfume into the presence, knowing, as you
must all do, how offensive it is to me."

The little group glanced from one to the other with protestations of
innocence.  The faithful Bontems, however, with his stealthy step, had
passed along behind them, and had detected the offender.

"My lord of Toulouse, the smell comes from you," he said.

The Comte de Toulouse, a little ruddy-cheeked lad, flushed up at the
detection.

"If you please, sire, it is possible that Mademoiselle de Grammont may
have wet my coat with her casting-bottle when we all played together at
Marly yesterday," he stammered.  "I had not observed it, but if it
offends your Majesty--"

"Take it away! take it away!" cried the king.  "Pah! it chokes and
stifles me!  Open the lower casement, Bontems.  No; never heed, now that
he is gone.  Monsieur de St. Quentin, is not this our shaving morning?"

"Yes, sire; all is ready."

"Then why not proceed?  It is three minutes after the accustomed time.
To work, sir; and you, Bontems, give word for the _grand lever_."

It was obvious that the king was not in a very good humour that morning.
He darted little quick questioning glances at his brother and at his
sons, but whatever complaint or sarcasm may have trembled upon his lips,
was effectually stifled by De St. Quentin's ministrations.  With the
nonchalance born of long custom, the official covered the royal chin
with soap, drew the razor swiftly round it, and sponged over the surface
with spirits of wine.  A nobleman then helped to draw on the king's
black velvet _haut-de-chausses_, a second assisted in arranging them,
while a third drew the night-gown over the shoulders, and handed the
royal shirt, which had been warming before the fire.  His
diamond-buckled shoes, his gaiters, and his scarlet inner vest were
successively fastened by noble courtiers, each keenly jealous of his own
privilege, and over the vest was placed the blue ribbon with the cross
of the Holy Ghost in diamonds, and that of St. Louis tied with red.
To one to whom the sight was new, it might have seemed strange to see
the little man, listless, passive, with his eyes fixed thoughtfully on
the burning logs, while this group of men, each with a historic name,
bustled round him, adding a touch here and a touch there, like a knot of
children with a favourite doll.  The black undercoat was drawn on, the
cravat of rich lace adjusted, the loose overcoat secured, two
handkerchiefs of costly point carried forward upon an enamelled saucer,
and thrust by separate officials into each side pocket, the silver and
ebony cane laid to hand, and the monarch was ready for the labours of
the day.

During the half-hour or so which had been occupied in this manner there
had been a constant opening and closing of the chamber door, and a
muttering of names from the captain of the guard to the attendant in
charge, and from the attendant in charge to the first gentleman of the
chamber, ending always in the admission of some new visitor.  Each as he
entered bowed profoundly three times, as a salute to majesty, and then
attached himself to his own little clique or coterie, to gossip in a low
voice over the news, the weather, and the plans of the day.  Gradually
the numbers increased, until by the time the king's frugal first
breakfast of bread and twice watered wine had been carried in, the large
square chamber was quite filled with a throng of men many of whom had
helped to make the epoch the most illustrious of French history.
Here, close by the king, was the harsh but energetic Louvois,
all-powerful now since the death of his rival Colbert, discussing a
question of military organisation with two officers, the one a tall and
stately soldier, the other a strange little figure, undersized and
misshapen, but bearing the insignia of a marshal of France, and owning a
name which was of evil omen over the Dutch frontier, for Luxembourg was
looked upon already as the successor of Conde, even as his companion
Vauban was of Turenne.  Beside them, a small white-haired clerical with
a kindly face, Pere la Chaise, confessor to the king, was whispering his
views upon Jansenism to the portly Bossuet, the eloquent Bishop of
Meaux, and to the tall thin young Abbe de Fenelon, who listened with a
clouded brow, for it was suspected that his own opinions were tainted
with the heresy in question.  There, too, was Le Brun, the painter,
discussing art in a small circle which contained his fellow-workers
Verrio and Laguerre, the architects Blondel and Le Notre, and sculptors
Girardon, Puget, Desjardins, and Coysevox, whose works had done so much
to beautify the new palace of the king.  Close to the door, Racine, with
his handsome face wreathed in smiles, was chatting with the poet Boileau
and the architect Mansard, the three laughing and jesting with the
freedom which was natural to the favourite servants of the king, the
only subjects who might walk unannounced and without ceremony into and
out of his chamber.

"What is amiss with him this morning?" asked Boileau in a whisper,
nodding his head in the direction of the royal group.  "I fear that his
sleep has not improved his temper."

"He becomes harder and harder to amuse," said Racine, shaking his head.
"I am to be at Madame De Maintenon's room at three to see whether a page
or two of the _Phedre_ may not work a change."

"My friend," said the architect, "do you not think that madame herself
might be a better consoler than your _Phedre_?"

"Madame is a wonderful woman.  She has brains, she has heart, she has
tact--she is admirable."

"And yet she has one gift too many."

"And that is?"

"Age."

"Pooh!  What matter her years when she can carry them like thirty?
What an eye!  What an arm!  And besides, my friends, he is not himself a
boy any longer."

"Ah, but that is another thing."

"A man's age is an incident, a woman's a calamity."

"Very true.  But a young man consults his eye, and an older man his ear.
Over forty, it is the clever tongue which wins; under it, the pretty
face."

"Ah, you rascal! Then you have made up your mind that five-and-forty
years with tact will hold the field against nine-and-thirty with beauty.
Well, when your lady has won, she will doubtless remember who were the
first to pay court to her."

"But I think that you are wrong, Racine."

"Well, we shall see."

"And if you are wrong--"

"Well, what then?"

"Then it may be a little serious for you."

"And why?"

"The Marquise de Montespan has a memory."

"Her influence may soon be nothing more."

"Do not rely too much upon it, my friend.  When the Fontanges came up
from Provence, with her blue eyes and her copper hair, it was in every
man's mouth that Montespan had had her day.  Yet Fontanges is six feet
under a church crypt, and the marquise spent two hours with the king
last week.  She has won once, and may again."

"Ah, but this is a very different rival.  This is no slip of a country
girl, but the cleverest woman in France."

"Pshaw, Racine, you know our good master well, or you should, for you
seem to have been at his elbow since the days of the Fronde.  Is he a
man, think you, to be amused forever by sermons, or to spend his days at
the feet of a lady of that age, watching her at her tapestry-work, and
fondling her poodle, when all the fairest faces and brightest eyes of
France are as thick in his _salons_ as the tulips in a Dutch flower-bed?
No, no, it will be the Montespan, or if not she, some younger beauty."

"My dear Boileau, I say again that her sun is setting.  Have you not
heard the news?"

"Not a word."

"Her brother, Monsieur de Vivonne, has been refused the _entre_."

"Impossible!"


"But it is a fact."

"And when?"

"This very morning."

"From whom had you it?"

"From De Catinat, the captain of the guard.  He had his orders to bar
the way to him."

"Ha! then the king does indeed mean mischief.  That is why his brow is
so cloudy this morning, then.  By my faith, if the marquise has the
spirit with which folk credit her, he may find that it was easier to win
her than to slight her."

"Ay; the Mortemarts are no easy race to handle."

"Well, heaven send him a safe way out of it!  But who is this gentleman?
His face is somewhat grimmer than those to which the court is
accustomed.  Ha! the king catches sight of him, and Louvois beckons to
him to advance.  By my faith, he is one who would be more at his ease in
a tent than under a painted ceiling."

The stranger who had attracted Racine's attention was a tall thin man,
with a high aquiline nose, stern fierce gray eyes, peeping out from
under tufted brows, and a countenance so lined and marked by age, care,
and stress of weather that it stood out amid the prim courtier faces
which surrounded it as an old hawk might in a cage of birds of gay
plumage.  He was clad in a sombre-coloured suit which had become usual
at court since the king had put aside frivolity and Fontanges, but the
sword which hung from his waist was no fancy rapier, but a good
brass-hilted blade in a stained leather-sheath, which showed every sign
of having seen hard service.  He had been standing near the door, his
black-feathered beaver in his hand, glancing with a half-amused,
half-disdainful expression at the groups of gossips around him, but at
the sign from the minister of war he began to elbow his way forward,
pushing aside in no very ceremonious fashion all who barred his passage.

Louis possessed in a high degree the royal faculty of recognition.
"It is years since I have seen him, but I remember his face well," said
he, turning to his minister.  "It is the Comte de Frontenac, is it not?"

"Yes, sire," answered Louvois; "it is indeed Louis de Buade, Comte de
Frontenac, and formerly governor of Canada."

"We are glad to see you once more at our _lever_," said the monarch, as
the old nobleman stooped his head, and kissed the white hand which was
extended to him.  "I hope that the cold of Canada has not chilled the
warmth of your loyalty."

"Only death itself, sire, would be cold enough for that."

"Then I trust that it may remain to us for many long years.  We would
thank you for the care and pains which you have spent upon our province,
and if we have recalled you, it is chiefly that we would fain hear from
your own lips how all things go there.  And first, as the affairs of God
take precedence of those of France, how does the conversion of the
heathen prosper?"

"We cannot complain, sire.  The good fathers, both Jesuits and
Recollets, have done their best, though indeed they are both rather
ready to abandon the affairs of the next world in order to meddle with
those of this."

"What say you to that, father?" asked Louis, glancing, with a twinkle of
the eyes, at his Jesuit confessor.

"I say, sire, that when the affairs of this world have a bearing upon
those of the next, it is indeed the duty of a good priest, as of every
other good Catholic, to guide them right."

"That is very true, sire," said De Frontenac, with an angry flush upon
his swarthy cheek; "but as long as your Majesty did me the honour to
intrust those affairs no my own guidance, I would brook no interference
in the performance of my duties, whether the meddler were clad in coat
or cassock."

"Enough, sir, enough!" said Louis sharply.  "I had asked you about the
missions."

"They prosper, sire.  There are Iroquois at the Sault and the mountain,
Hurons at Lorette, and Algonquins along the whole river _cotes_ from
Tadousac in the East to Sault la Marie, and even the great plains of the
Dakotas, who have all taken the cross as their token.  Marquette has
passed down the river of the West to preach among the Illinois, and
Jesuits have carried the Gospel to the warriors of the Long House in
their wigwams at Onondaga."

"I may add, your Majesty," said Pere la Chaise, "that in leaving the
truth there, they have too often left their lives with it."

"Yes, sire, it is very true," cried De Frontenac cordially.  "Your
Majesty has many brave men within your domains, but none braver than
these.  They have come back up the Richelieu River from the Iroquois
villages with their nails gone, their fingers torn out, a cinder where
their eye should be, and the scars of the pine splinters as thick upon
their bodies as the _fleurs-de-lis_ on yonder curtain.  Yet, with a
month of nursing from the good Ursulines, they have used their remaining
eye to guide them back to the Indian country once more, where even the
dogs have been frightened at their haggled faces and twisted limbs."

"And you have suffered this?" cried Louis hotly.  "You allow these
infamous assassins to live?"

"I have asked for troops, sire."

"And I have sent some."

"One regiment."

"The Carignan-Saliere.  I have no better in my service.

"But more is needed, sire."

"There are the Canadians themselves.  Have you not a militia? Could you
not raise force enough to punish these rascally murderers of God's
priests?  I had always understood that you were a soldier."

De Frontenac's eyes flashed, and a quick answer seemed for an instant to
tremble upon his lips, but with an effort the fiery old man restrained
himself.  "Your Majesty will learn best whether I am a soldier or not,"
said he, "by asking those who have seen me at Seneffe, Mulhausen,
Salzbach, and half a score of other places where I had the honour of
upholding your Majesty's cause."

"Your services have not been forgotten."

"It is just because I am a soldier and have seen something of war that I
know how hard it is to penetrate into a country much larger than the
Lowlands, all thick with forest and bog, with a savage lurking behind
every tree, who, if he has not learned to step in time or to form line,
can at least bring down the running caribou at two hundred paces, and
travel three leagues to your one.  And then when you have at last
reached their villages, and burned their empty wigwams and a few acres
of maize fields, what the better are you then?  You can but travel back
again to your own land with a cloud of unseen men lurking behind you,
and a scalp-yell for every straggler.  You are a soldier yourself, sire.
I ask you if such a war is an easy task for a handful of soldiers, with
a few _censitaires_ straight from the  plough, and a troop of
_coureurs-de-bois_ whose hearts are all the time are with their traps
and their beaver-skins."

"No, no; I am sorry if I spoke too hastily," said Louis.  "We shall look
into the matter at our council."

"Then it warms my heart to hear you say so," cried the old governor.
"There will be joy down the long St. Lawrence, in white hearts and in
red, when it is known that their great father over the waters has
turned his mind towards them."

"And yet you must not look for too much, for Canada has been a heavy
cost to us, and we have many calls in Europe."

"Ah, sire, I would that you could see that great land.  When your
Majesty has won a campaign over here, what may come of it?  Glory, a few
miles of land Luxembourg, Strassburg, one more city in the kingdom;  but
over there, with a tenth of the cost and a hundredth part of the force,
there is a world ready to your hand.  It is so vast, sire, so rich, so
beautiful!  Where are there such hills, such forests, such rivers?
And it is all for us if we will but take it.  Who is there to stand in
our way?  A few nations of scattered Indians and a thin strip of English
farmers and fishermen.  Turn your thoughts there, sire, and in a few
years you would be able to stand upon your citadel at Quebec, and to say
there is one great empire here from the snows of the North to the warm
Southern Gulf, and from the waves of the ocean to the great plains
beyond Marquette's river, and the name of this empire is France, and her
king is Louis, and her flag is the _fleurs-de-lis_."

Louis's cheek had flushed at this ambitious picture, and he had leaned
forward in his chair, with flashing eyes, but he sank back again as the
governor concluded.

"On my word, count," said he, "you have caught something of this gift of
Indian eloquence of which we have heard.  But about these English folk.
They are Huguenots, are they not?"

"For the most part.  Especially in the North."

"Then it might be a service to Holy Church to send them packing.  They
have a city there, I am told.  New--New--How do they call it?"

"New York, sire.  They took it from the Dutch."

"Ah, New York.  And have I not heard of another? Bos--Bos--"

"Boston, sire."

"That is the name.  The harbours might be of service to us.  Tell me,
now, Frontenac," lowering his voice so that his words might be audible
only to the count, Louvois, and the royal circle, "what force would you
need to clear these people out?  One regiment, two regiments, and
perhaps a frigate or two?"

But the ex-governor shook his grizzled head.  "You do not know them,
sire," said he.  "They are stern folk, these.  We in Canada, with all
your gracious help, have found it hard to hold our own.  Yet these men
have had no help, but only hindrance, with cold and disease, and barren
lands, and Indian wars, but they have thriven and multiplied until the
woods thin away in front of them like ice in the sun, and their church
bells are heard where but yesterday the wolves were howling.  They are
peaceful folk, and slow to war, but when they have set their hands to
it, though they may be slack to begin, they are slacker still to cease.
To put New England into your Majesty's hands, I would ask fifteen
thousand of your best troops and twenty ships of the line."

Louis sprang impatiently from his chair, and caught up his cane.
"I wish," said he, "that you would imitate these people who seem to you
to be so formidable, in their excellent habit of doing things for
themselves.  The matter may stand until our council.  Reverend father,
it has struck the hour of chapel, and all else may wait until we have
paid out duties to heaven."  Taking a missal from the hands of an
attendant, he walked as fast as his very high heels would permit him,
towards the door, the court forming a lane through which he might pass,
and then closing up behind to follow him in order of precedence.



CHAPTER III.


THE HOLDING OF THE DOOR.

Whilst Louis had been affording his court that which he had openly
stated to be the highest of human pleasures--the sight of the royal
face--the young officer of the guard outside had been very busy passing
on the titles of the numerous applicants for admission, and exchanging
usually a smile or a few words of greeting with them, for his frank,
handsome face was a well-known one at the court.  With his merry eyes
and his brisk bearing, he looked like a man who was on good terms with
Fortune.  Indeed, he had good cause to be so, for she had used him well.
Three years ago he had been an unknown subaltern bush-fighting with
Algonquins and Iroquois in the wilds of Canada.  An exchange had brought
him back to France and into the regiment of Picardy, but the lucky
chance of having seized the bridle of the king's horse one winter's day
in Fontainebleau when the creature was plunging within a few yards of a
deep gravel-pit had done for him what ten campaigns might have failed to
accomplish.  Now as a trusted officer of the king's guard, young,
gallant, and popular, his lot was indeed an enviable one.  And yet, with
the strange perversity of human nature, he was already surfeited with
the dull if magnificent routine of the king's household, and looked back
with regret to the rougher and freer days of his early service.
Even there at the royal door his mind had turned away from the frescoed
passage and the groups of courtiers to the wild ravines and foaming
rivers of the West, when suddenly his eyes lit upon a face which he had
last seen among those very scenes.

"Ah, Monsieur de Frontenac!" he cried.  "You cannot have forgotten me."

"What!  De Catinat!  Ah, it is a joy indeed to see a face from over the
water!  But there is a long step between a subaltern in the Carignan and
a captain in the guards.  You have risen rapidly."

"Yes; and yet I may be none the happier for it.  There are times when I
would give it all to be dancing down the Lachine Rapids in a birch
canoe, or to see the red and the yellow on those hill-sides once more at
the fall of the leaf."

"Ay," sighed De Frontenac.  "You know that my fortunes have sunk as
yours have risen.  I have been recalled, and De la Barre is in my place.
But there will be a storm there which such a man as he can never stand
against.  With the Iroquois all dancing the scalp-dance, and Dongan
behind them in New York to whoop them on, they will need me, and they
will find me waiting when they send.  I will see the king now, and try
if I cannot rouse him to play the great monarch there as well as here.
Had I but his power in my hands, I should change the world's history."

"Hush! No treason to the captain of the guard," cried De Catinat,
laughing, while the stern old soldier strode past him into the king's
presence.

A gentleman very richly dressed in black and silver had come up during
this short conversation, and advanced, as the door opened, with the
assured air of a man whose rights are beyond dispute.  Captain de
Catinat, however, took a quick step forward, and barred him off from the
door.

"I am very sorry, Monsieur de Vivonne," said he, "but you are forbidden
the presence."

"Forbidden the presence!  I?  You are mad!"  He stepped back with gray
face and staring eyes, one shaking hand half raised in protest,

"I assure you that it is his order."

"But it is incredible.  It is a mistake."

"Very possibly."

"Then you will let me past."

"My orders leave me no discretion."

"If I could have one word with the king."

"Unfortunately, monsieur, it is impossible."

"Only one word."

"It really does not rest with me, monsieur."

The angry nobleman stamped his foot, and stared at the door as though he
had some thoughts of forcing a passage.  Then turning on his heel, he
hastened away down the corridor with the air of a man who has come to a
decision.

"There, now," grumbled De Catinat to himself, as he pulled at his thick
dark moustache, "he is off to make some fresh mischief.  I'll have his
sister here presently, as like as not, and a pleasant little choice
between breaking my orders and making an enemy of her for life.
I'd rather hold Fort Richelieu against the Iroquois than the king's door
against an angry woman.  By my faith, here _is_ a lady, as I feared!
Ah, Heaven be praised! it is a friend, and not a foe.  Good-morning,
Mademoiselle Nanon."

"Good-morning, Captain de Catinat."

The new-comer was a tall, graceful brunette, her fresh face and
sparkling black eyes the brighter in contrast with her plain dress.

"I am on guard, you see.  I cannot talk with you."

"I cannot remember having asked monsieur to talk with me."

"Ah, but you must not pout in that pretty way, or else I cannot help
talking to you," whispered the captain.  "What is this in your hand,
then?"

"A note from Madame de Maintenon to the king.  You will hand it to him,
will you not?"

"Certainly, mademoiselle.  And how is Madame, your mistress?"

"Oh, her director has been with her all the morning, and his talk is
very, very good; but it is also very, very sad.  We are not very
cheerful when Monsieur Godet has been to see us.  But I forget monsieur
is a Huguenot, and knows nothing of directors."

"Oh, but I do not trouble about such differences.  I let the Sorbonne
and Geneva fight it out between them.  Yet a man must stand by his
family, you know."

"Ah! if Monsieur could talk to Madame de Maintenon a little!  She would
convert him."

"I would rather talk to Mademoiselle Nanon, but if--"

"Oh!"  There was an exclamation, a whisk of dark skirts, and the
soubrette had disappeared down a side passage.

Along the broad, lighted corridor was gliding a very stately and
beautiful lady, tall, graceful, and exceedingly haughty.  She was richly
clad in a bodice of gold-coloured camlet and a skirt of gray silk
trimmed with gold and silver lace.  A handkerchief of priceless Genoa
point half hid and half revealed her beautiful throat, and was fastened
in front by a cluster of pearls, while a rope of the same, each one
worth a bourgeois' income, was coiled in and out through her luxuriant
hair.  The lady was past her first youth, it is true, but the
magnificent curves of her queenly figure, the purity of her complexion,
the brightness of her deep-lashed blue eyes and the clear regularity of
her features enabled her still to claim to be the most handsome as well
as the most sharp-tongued woman in the court of France.  So beautiful
was her bearing, the carriage of her dainty head upon her proud white
neck, and the sweep of her stately walk, that the young officer's fears
were overpowered in his admiration, and he found it hard, as he raised
his hand in salute, to retain the firm countenance which his duties
demanded.

"Ah, it is Captain de Catinat," said Madame de Montespan, with a smile
which was more embarrassing to him than any frown could have been.

"Your humble servant, marquise."

"I am fortunate in finding a friend here, for there has been some
ridiculous mistake this morning."

"I am concerned to hear it."

"It was about my brother, Monsieur de Vivonne.  It is almost too
laughable to mention, but he was actually refused admission to the
_lever_."

"It was my misfortune to have to refuse him, madame."

"You, Captain de Catinat?  And by what right?"  She had drawn up her
superb figure, and her large blue eyes were blazing with indignant
astonishment.

"The king's order, madame."

"The king!  Is it likely that the king would cast a public slight upon
my family?  From whom had you this preposterous order?"

"Direct from the king through Bontems."

"Absurd!  Do you think that the king would venture to exclude a
Mortemart through the mouth of a valet? You have been dreaming,
captain."

"I trust that it may prove so, madame."

"But such dreams are not very fortunate to the dreamer.  Go, tell the
king that I am here, and would have a word with him."

"Impossible, madame."

"And why?"

"I have been forbidden to carry a message."

"To carry any message?"

"Any from you, madame."

"Come, captain, you improve.  It only needed this insult to make the
thing complete.  You may carry a message to the king from any
adventuress, from any decayed governess"--she laughed shrilly at her
description of her rival--"but none from Francoise de Mortemart,
Marquise de Montespan?"

"Such are my orders, madame.  It pains me deeply to be compelled to
carry them out."

"You may spare your protestations, captain.  You may yet find that you
have every reason to be deeply pained.  For the last time, do you refuse
to carry my message to the king?"

"I must, madame."

"Then I carry it myself."

She sprang forward at the door, but he slipped in front of her with
outstretched arms.

"For God's sake, consider yourself, madame!" he entreated.  "Other eyes
are upon you."

"Pah! Canaille!"  She glanced at the knot of Switzers, whose sergeant
had drawn them off a few paces, and who stood open-eyed, staring at the
scene.

"I tell you that I _will_ see the king."

"No lady has ever been at the morning _lever_."

"Then I shall be the first."

"You will ruin me if you pass."

"And none the less, I shall do so."

The matter looked serious.  De Catinat was a man of resource, but for
once he was at his wits' end.  Madame de Montespan's resolution, as it
was called in her presence, or effrontery, as it was termed behind her
back, was proverbial.  If she attempted to force her way, would he
venture to use violence upon one who only yesterday had held the
fortunes of the whole court in the hollow of her hand, and who, with her
beauty, her wit, and her energy, might very well be in the same position
to-morrow?  If she passed him, then his future was ruined with the king,
who never brooked the smallest deviation from his orders.  On the other
hand, if he thrust her back, he did that which could never be forgiven,
and which would entail some deadly vengeance should she return to power.
It was an unpleasant dilemma.  But a happy thought flashed into his mind
at the very moment when she, with clenched hand and flashing eyes, was
on the point of making a fresh attempt to pass him.

"If madame would deign to wait," said he soothingly, "the king will be
on his way to the chapel in an instant."

"It is not yet time."

"I think the hour has just gone."

"And why should I wait, like a lackey?"

"It is but a moment, madame."

"No, I shall not wait."  She took a step forward towards the door.

But the guardsman's quick ear had caught the sound of moving feet from
within, and he knew that he was master of the situation.

"I will take Madame's message," said he.

"Ah, you have recovered your senses!  Go, tell the king that I wish to
speak with him."

He must gain a little time yet.  "Shall I say it through the lord in
waiting?"

"No; yourself."

"Publicly?"

"No, no; for his private ear."

"Shall I give a reason for your request?"

"Oh, you madden me!  Say what I have told you, and at once."

But the young officer's dilemma was happily over.

At that instant the double doors were swung open, and Louis appeared in
the opening, strutting forwards on his high-heeled shoes, his stick
tapping, his broad skirts flapping, and his courtiers spreading out
behind him.  He stopped as he came out, and turned to the captain of the
guard.

"You have a note for me?"

"Yes, sire."

The monarch slipped it into the pocket of his scarlet undervest, and was
advancing once more when his eyes fell upon Madame de Montespan standing
very stiff and erect in the middle of the passage.  A dark flush of
anger shot to his brow, and he walked swiftly past her without a word;
but she turned and kept pace with him  down the corridor.

"I had not expected this honour, madame," said he.

"Nor had I expected this insult, sire."

"An insult, madame?  You forget yourself."

"No; it is you who have forgotten me, sire."

"You intrude upon me."

"I wished to hear my fate from your own lips," she whispered.  "I can
bear to be struck myself, sire, even by him who has my heart.  But it is
hard to hear that one's brother has been wounded through the mouths of
valets and Huguenot soldiers for no fault of his, save that his sister
has loved too fondly."

"It is no time to speak of such things."

"When can I see you, then, sire?"

"In your chamber."

"At what hour?"

"At four."

"Then I shall trouble your Majesty no further."  She swept him one of
the graceful courtesies for which she was famous, and turned away down a
side passage with triumph shining in her eyes.  Her beauty and her
spirit had never failed her yet, and now that she had the monarch's
promise of an interview she never doubted that she could do as she had
done before, and win back the heart of the man, however much against the
conscience of the king.



CHAPTER IV.


THE FATHER OF HIS PEOPLE.

Louis had walked on to his devotions in no very charitable frame of
mind, as was easily to be seen from his clouded brow and compressed
lips.  He knew his late favourite well, her impulsiveness, her audacity,
her lack of all restraint when thwarted or opposed.  She was capable of
making a hideous scandal, of turning against him that bitter tongue
which had so often made him laugh at the expense of others, perhaps even
of making some public exposure which would leave him the butt and gossip
of Europe.  He shuddered at the thought.  At all costs such a
catastrophe must be averted.  And yet how could he cut the tie which
bound them?  He had broken other such bonds as these; but the gentle La
Valliere had shrunk into a convent at the very first glance which had
told her of waning love.  That was true affection.  But this woman would
struggle hard, fight to the bitter end, before she would quit the
position which was so dear to her.  She spoke of her wrongs.  What were
her wrongs?  In his intense selfishness, nurtured by the eternal
flattery which was the very air he breathed, he could not see that the
fifteen years of her life which he had absorbed, or the loss of the
husband whom he had supplanted, gave her any claim upon him.  In his
view he had raised her to the highest position which a subject could
occupy.  Now he was weary of her, and it was her duty to retire with
resignation, nay, even with gratitude for past favours.  She should have
a pension, and the children should be cared for.  What could a
reasonable woman ask for more?

And then his motives for discarding her were so excellent.  He turned
them over in his mind as he knelt listening to the Archbishop of Paris
reciting the Mass, and the more he thought, the more he approved.  His
conception of the deity was as a larger Louis, and of heaven as a more
gorgeous Versailles.  If he exacted obedience from his twenty millions,
then he must show it also to this one who had a right to demand it of
him.  On the whole, his conscience acquitted him. But in this one matter
he had been lax.  From the first coming of his gentle and forgiving
young wife from Spain, he had never once permitted her to be without a
rival.  Now that she was dead, the matter was no better.  One favourite
had succeeded another, and if De Montespan had held her own so long, it
was rather from her audacity than from his affection.  But now Father La
Chaise and Bossuet were ever reminding him that he had topped the summit
of his life, and was already upon that downward path which leads to the
grave.  His wild outburst over the unhappy Fontanges had represented the
last flicker of his passions. The time had come for gravity and for
calm, neither of which was to be expected in the company of Madame de
Montespan.

But he had found out where they were to be enjoyed.  From the day when
De Montespan had introduced the stately and silent widow as a governess
for his children, he had found a never-failing and ever-increasing
pleasure in her society.  In the early days of her coming he had sat for
hours in the rooms of his favourite, watching the tact and sweetness of
temper with which her dependent controlled the mutinous spirits of the
petulant young Duc du Maine and the mischievous little Comte de
Toulouse.  He had been there nominally for the purpose of superintending
the teaching, but he had confined himself to admiring the teacher.
And then in time he too had been drawn into the attraction of that
strong sweet nature, and had found himself consulting her upon points of
conduct, and acting upon her advice with a docility which he had never
shown before to minister or mistress.  For a time he had thought that
her piety and her talk of principle might be a mere mask, for he was
accustomed to hypocrisy all round him.  It was surely unlikely that a
woman who was still beautiful, with as bright an eye and as graceful a
figure as any in his court, could, after a life spent in the gayest
circles, preserve the spirit of a nun.  But on this point he was soon
undeceived, for when his own language had become warmer than that of
friendship, he had been met by an iciness of manner and a brevity of
speech which had shown him that there was one woman at least in his
dominions who had a higher respect for herself than for him.  And
perhaps it was better so.  The placid pleasures of friendship were very
soothing after the storms of passion.  To sit in her room every
afternoon, to listen to talk which was not tainted with flattery, and to
hear opinions which were not framed to please his ear, were the
occupations now of his happiest hours.  And then her influence over him
was all so good!  She spoke of his kingly duties, of his example to his
subjects, of his preparation for the World beyond, and of the need for
an effort to snap the guilty ties which he had formed.  She was as good
as a confessor--a confessor with a lovely face and a perfect arm.

And now he knew that the time had come when he  must choose between her
and De Montespan.  Their influences were antagonistic.  They could not
continue together.  He stood between virtue and vice, and he must
choose.  Vice was very attractive too, very comely, very witty, and
holding him by that chain of custom which is so hard to shake off.
There were hours when his nature swayed strongly over to that side, and
when he was tempted to fall back into his old life.  But Bossuet and
Pere la Chaise were ever at his elbows to whisper encouragement, and,
above all, there was Madame de Maintenon to remind him of what was due
to his position and to his six-and-forty years.  Now at last he had
braced himself for a supreme effort.  There was no safety for him while
his old favourite was at court.  He knew himself too well to have any
faith in a lasting change so long as she was there ever waiting for his
moment of weakness.  She must be persuaded to leave Versailles, if
without a scandal it could be done.  He would be firm when he met her in
the afternoon, and make her understand once for all that her reign was
forever over.

Such were the thoughts which ran through the king's head as he bent over
the rich crimson cushion which topped his _prie-dieu_ of carved oak.
He knelt in his own enclosure to the right of the altar, with his guards
and his immediate household around him, while the court, ladies and
cavaliers, filled the chapel.  Piety was a fashion now, like dark
overcoats and lace cravats, and no courtier was so worldly-minded as not
to have had a touch of grace since the king had taken to religion.
Yet they looked very bored, these soldiers and seigneurs, yawning and
blinking over the missals, while some who seemed more intent upon their
devotions were really dipping into the latest romance of Scudery or
Calpernedi, cunningly bound up in a sombre cover.  The ladies, indeed,
were more devout, and were determined that all should see it, for each
had lit a tiny taper, which she held in front of her on the plea of
lighting up her missal, but really that her face might be visible to the
king, and inform him that hers was a kindred spirit.  A few there may
have been, here and there, whose prayers rose from their hearts, and who
were there of their own free will; but the policy of Louis had changed
his noblemen into courtiers and his men of the world into hypocrites,
until the whole court was like one gigantic mirror which reflected his
own likeness a hundredfold.

It was the habit of Louis, as he walked back from the chapel, to receive
petitions or to listen to any tales of wrong which his subjects might
bring to him.  His way, as he returned to his rooms, lay partly across
an open space, and here it was that the suppliants were wont to
assemble.  On this particular morning there were but two or three--a
Parisian, who conceived himself injured by the provost of his guild, a
peasant whose cow had  been torn by a huntsman's dog, and a farmer who
had had hard usage from his feudal lord.  A few questions and then a
hurried order to his secretary disposed of each case, for if Louis was a
tyrant himself, he had at least the merit that he insisted upon being
the only one within his kingdom.  He was about to resume his way again,
when an elderly man, clad in the garb of a respectable citizen, and with
a strong deep-lined face which marked him as a man of character, darted
forward, and threw himself down upon one knee in front of the monarch.

"Justice, sire, justice!" he cried.

"What is this, then?" asked Louis.  "Who are you, and what is it that
you want?"

"I am a citizen of Paris, and I have been cruelly wronged."

"You seem a very worthy person.  If you have indeed been wronged you
shall have redress.  What have you to complain of?"

"Twenty of the Blue Dragoons of Languedoc are quartered in my house,
with Captain Dalbert at their head.  They have devoured my food, stolen
my property, and beaten my servants, yet the magistrates will give me no
redress.'

"On my life, justice seems to be administered in a strange fashion in
our city of Paris!" exclaimed the king wrathfully.

"It is indeed a shameful case," said Bossuet.

"And yet there may be a very good reason for it," suggested Pere la
Chaise.  "I would suggest that your Majesty should ask this man his
name, his business, and why it was that the dragoons were quartered upon
him."

"You hear the reverend father's question."

"My name, sire, is Catinat, by trade I am a merchant in cloth, and I am
treated in this fashion because I am of the Reformed Church."

"I thought as much!" cried the confessor.

"That alters matters," said Bossuet.

The king shook his head and his brow darkened.  "You have only yourself
to thank, then.  The remedy is in your hands."

"And how, sire?"

"By embracing the only true faith."

"I am already a member of it, sire."

The king stamped his foot angrily.  "I can see that you are a very
insolent heretic," said he.  "There is but one Church in France, and
that is my Church.  If you are outside that, you cannot look to me for
aid."

"My creed is that of my father, sire, and of my grandfather."

"If they have sinned it is no reason why you should.  My own grandfather
erred also before his eyes were opened."

"But he nobly atoned for his error," murmured the Jesuit.

"Then you will not help me, sire?"

"You must first help yourself."

The old Huguenot stood up with a gesture of despair, while the king
continued on his way, the two ecclesiastics, on either side of him,
murmuring their approval into his ears.

"You have done nobly, sire."

"You are truly the first son of the Church."

"You are the worthy successor of St. Louis."

But the king bore the face of a man who was not absolutely satisfied
with his own action.

"You do not think, then, that these people have too hard a measure?"
said he.

"Too hard?  Nay, your Majesty errs on the side of mercy."

"I hear that they are leaving my kingdom in great numbers."

"And surely it is better so, sire; for what blessing can come upon a
country which has such stubborn infidels within its boundaries?"

"Those who are traitors to God can scarce be loyal to the king,"
remarked Bossuet.  "Your Majesty's power would be greater if there were
no temple, as they call their dens of heresy, within your dominions."

"My grandfather promised them protection.  They are shielded, as you
well know, by the edict which be gave at Nantes."

"But it lies with your Majesty to undo the mischief that has been done."

"And how?"

"By recalling the edict."

"And driving into the open arms of my enemies two millions of my best
artisans and of my bravest servants.  No, no, father, I have, I trust,
every zeal for Mother-Church, but there is some truth in what De
Frontenac said this morning of the evil which comes from mixing the
affairs of this world with those of the next.  How say you, Louvois?"

"With all respect to the Church, sire, I would say that the devil has
given these men such cunning of hand and of brain that they are the best
workers and traders in your Majesty's kingdom.  I know not how the state
coffers are to be filled if such tax-payers go from among us.  Already
many have left the country and taken their trades with them.  If all
were to go, it would be worse for us than a lost campaign."

"But," remarked Bossuet, "if it were once known that the king's will had
been expressed, your Majesty may rest assured that even the worst of his
subjects bear him such love that they would hasten to come within the
pale of Holy Church.  As long as the edict stands, it seems to them that
the king is lukewarm, and that they may abide in their error."

The king shook his head.  "They have always been stubborn folk," said
he.

"Perhaps," remarked Louvois, glancing maliciously at Bossuet, "were the
bishops of France to make an offering to the state of the treasures of
their sees, we might then do without these Huguenot taxes."

"All that the Church has is at the king's service," answered Bossuet
curtly.

"The kingdom is mine and all that is in it," remarked Louis, as they
entered the _Grand Salon_, in which the court assembled after chapel,
"yet I trust that it may be long before I have to claim the wealth of
the Church."

"We trust so, sire," echoed the ecclesiastics.

"But we may reserve such topics for our council-chamber.  Where is
Mansard?  I must see his plans for the new wing at Marly."  He crossed
to a side table, and was buried in an instant in his favourite pursuit,
inspecting the gigantic plans of the great architect, and inquiring
eagerly as to the progress of the work.

"I think," said Pere la Chaise, drawing Bossuet aside, "that your Grace
has made some impression upon the king's mind."

"With your powerful assistance, father."

"Oh, you may rest assured that I shall lose no opportunity of pushing on
the good work."

"If you take it in hand, it is done."

"But there is another who has more weight than I."

"The favourite, De Montespan?"

"No, no; her day is gone.  It is Madame de Maintenon."

"I hear that she is very devout."

"Very.  But she has no love for my Order.  She is a Sulpitian.  Yet we
may all work to one end.  Now if you were to speak to her, your Grace."

"With all my heart."

"Show her how good a service it would be could she bring about the
banishment of the Huguenots."

"I shall do so."

"And offer her in return that we will promote--" he bent forward and
whispered into the prelate's ear.

"What!  He would not do it!"

"And why?  The queen is dead."

"The widow of the poet Scarron!"

"She is of good birth.  Her grandfather and his were dear friends."

"It is impossible."

"But I know his heart, and I say it is possible."

"You certainly know his heart, father, if any can.  But such a thought
had never entered my head."

"Then let it enter and remain there.  If she will serve the Church, the
Church will serve her.  But the king beckons, and I must go."

The thin dark figure hastened off through the throng of courtiers, and
the great Bishop of Meaux remained standing with his chin upon his
breast, sunk in reflection.

By this time all the court was assembled in the _Grand Salon_, and the
huge room was gay from end to end with the silks, the velvets, and the
brocades of the ladies, the glitter of jewels, the flirt of painted
fans, and the sweep of plume or aigrette.  The grays, blacks, and browns
of the men's coats toned down the mass of colour, for all must be dark
when the king was dark, and only the blues of the officers' uniforms,
and the pearl and gray of the musketeers of the guard, remained to call
back those early days of the reign when the men had vied with the women
in the costliness and brilliancy of their wardrobes.  And if dresses had
changed, manners had done so even more.  The old levity and the old
passions lay doubtless very near the surface, but grave faces and
serious talk were the fashion of the hour.  It was no longer the lucky
_coup_ at the lansquenet table, the last comedy of Moliere, or the new
opera of Lully about which they gossiped, but it was on the evils of
Jansenism, on the expulsion of Arnauld from the Sorbonne, on the
insolence of Pascal, or on the comparative merits of two such popular
preachers as Bourdaloue and Massilon.  So, under a radiant ceiling and
over a many-coloured floor, surrounded by immortal paintings, set
thickly in gold and ornament, there moved these nobles and ladies of
France, all moulding themselves upon the one little dark figure in their
midst, who was himself so far from being his own master that he hung
balanced even now between two rival women, who were playing a game in
which the future of France and his own destiny were the stakes.



CHAPTER V.


CHILDREN OF BELIAL.

The elderly Huguenot had stood silent after his repulse by the king,
with his eyes cast moodily downwards, and a face in which doubt, sorrow,
and anger contended for the mastery.  He was a very large, gaunt man,
raw-boned and haggard, with a wide forehead, a large, fleshy nose, and a
powerful chin.  He wore neither wig nor powder, but Nature had put her
own silvering upon his thick grizzled locks, and the thousand puckers
which clustered round the edges of his eyes, or drew at the corners of
his mouth, gave a set gravity to his face which needed no device of the
barber to increase it.  Yet in spite of his mature years, the swift
anger with which he had sprung up when the king refused his plaint, and
the keen fiery glance which he had shot at the royal court as they filed
past him with many a scornful smile and whispered gibe at his expense,
all showed that he had still preserved something of the strength and of
the spirit of his youth.  He was dressed as became his rank, plainly and
yet well, in a sad-coloured brown kersey coat with silver-plated
buttons, knee-breeches of the same, and white woollen stockings, ending
in broad-toed black leather shoes cut across with a great steel buckle.
In one hand he carried his low felt hat, trimmed with gold edging, and
in the other a little cylinder of paper containing a recital of his
wrongs, which he had hoped to leave in the hands of the king's
secretary.

His doubts as to what his next step should be were soon resolved for him
in a very summary fashion.  These were days when, if the Huguenot was
not absolutely forbidden in France, he was at least looked upon as a
man who existed upon sufferance, and who was unshielded by the laws
which protected his Catholic fellow-subjects.  For twenty years the
stringency of the persecution had increased until there was no weapon
which bigotry could employ, short of absolute expulsion, which had not
been turned against him.  He was impeded in his business, elbowed out of
all public employment, his house filled with troops, his children
encouraged to rebel against him, and all redress refused him for the
insults and assaults to which he was subjected.  Every rascal who wished
to gratify his personal spite, or to gain favour with his bigoted
superiors, might do his worst upon him without fear of the law.  Yet, in
spite of all, these men clung to the land which disowned them, and, full
of the love for their native soil which lies so deep in a Frenchman's
heart, preferred insult and contumely at home to the welcome which would
await them beyond the seas.  Already, however, the shadow of those days
was falling upon them when the choice should no longer be theirs.

Two of the king's big blue-coated guardsmen were on duty at that side of
the palace, and had been witnesses to his unsuccessful appeal.  Now they
tramped across together to where he was standing, and broke brutally
into the current of his thoughts.

"Now, Hymn-books," said one gruffly, "get off again about your
business."

"You're not a very pretty ornament to the king's pathway," cried the
other, with a hideous oath.  "Who are you, to turn up your nose at the
king's religion, curse you?"

The old Huguenot shot a glance of anger and contempt  at them, and was
turning to go, when one of them thrust at his ribs with the butt end of
his halberd.

"Take that, you dog!" he cried.  "Would you dare to look like that at
the king's guard?"

"Children of Belial," cried the old man, with his hand pressed to his
side, "were I twenty years younger you would not have dared to use me
so."

"Ha! you would still spit your venom, would you?  That is enough, Andre!
He has threatened the king's guard.  Let us seize him and drag him to
the guard-room."

The two soldiers dropped their halberds and rushed upon the old man,
but, tall and strong as they were, they found it no easy matter to
secure him.  With his long sinewy arms and his wiry frame, he shook
himself clear of them again and again, and it was only when his breath
had failed him that the two, torn and panting, were able to twist round
his wrists, and so secure him.  They had hardly won their pitiful
victory, however, before a stern voice and a sword flashing before their
eyes, compelled them to release their prisoner once more.

It was Captain de Catinat, who, his morning duties over, had strolled
out on to the terrace, and had come upon this sudden scene of outrage.
At the sight of the old man's face he gave a violent start, and drawing
his sword, had rushed forward with such fury that the two guardsmen not
only dropped their victim, but, staggering back from the threatening
sword-point, one of them slipped and the other rolled over him, a
revolving mass of blue coat and white kersey.

"Villains!" roared De Catinat.  "What is the meaning of this?"

The two had stumbled on to their feet again, very shamefaced and
ruffled.

"If you please, captain," said one, saluting, "this is a Huguenot who
abused the royal guard."

"His petition had been rejected by the king, captain, and yet he refused
to go."

De Catinat was white with fury.  "And so, when a French citizen has come
to have a word with the great master of his country, he must be harassed
by two Swiss dogs like you?" he cried.  "By my faith, we shall soon see
about that!"

He drew a little silver whistle from his pocket, and at the shrill
summons an old sergeant and half a dozen soldiers came running from the
guard-room.

"Your names?" asked the captain sternly.

"Andre Meunier."

"And yours?"

"Nicholas Klopper."

"Sergeant, you will arrest these men, Meunier and Klopper."

"Certainly, captain," said the sergeant, a dark grizzled old soldier of
Conde and Turenne.

"See that they are tried to-day."

"And on what charge, captain?"

"For assaulting an aged and respected citizen who had come on business
to the king."

"He was a Huguenot on his own confession," cried the culprits together.

"Hum!"  The sergeant pulled doubtfully at his long moustache.  "Shall we
put the charge in that form, captain?  Just as the captain pleases."
He gave a little shrug of his epauletted shoulders to signify his doubt
whether any good could arise from it.

"No," said De Catinat, with a sudden happy thought.  "I charge them with
laying their halberds down while on duty, and with having their uniforms
dirty and disarranged."

"That is better," answered the sergeant, with the freedom of a
privileged veteran.  "Thunder of God, but you have disgraced the guards!
An hour on the wooden horse with a musket at either foot may teach you
that halberds were made for a soldier's hand, and not for the king's
grass-plot.  Seize them!  Attention!  Right half turn!  March!"

And away went the little clump of guardsmen with the sergeant in the
rear.

The Huguenot had stood in the background, grave and composed, without
any sign of exultation, during this sudden reversal of fortune; but when
the soldiers were gone, he and the young officer turned warmly upon each
other.

"Amory, I had not hoped to see you!"

"Nor I you, uncle.  What, in the name of wonder, brings you to
Versailles?"

"My wrongs, Amory.  The hand of the wicked is heavy upon us, and whom
can we turn to save only the king?"

The young officer shook his head.  "The king is at heart a good man,"
said he.  "But he can only see the world through the glasses which are
held before him.  You have nothing to hope from him."

"He spurned me from his presence."

"Did he ask your name?"

"He did, and I gave it."

The young guardsman whistled.  "Let us walk to the gate," said he.
"By my faith, if my kinsmen are to come and bandy arguments with the
king, it may not be long before my company finds itself without its
captain."

"The king would not couple us together.  But indeed, nephew, it is
strange to me how you can live in this house of Baal and yet bow down to
no false gods."

"I keep my belief in my own heart."

The older man shook his head gravely.

"Your ways lie along a very narrow path," said he, "with temptation and
danger ever at your feet.  It is hard for you to walk with the Lord,
Amory, and yet go hand in hand with the persecutors of His people."

"Tut, uncle!" said the young man impatiently.  "I am a soldier of the
king's, and I am willing to let the black gown and the white surplice
settle these matters between them.  Let me live in honour and die in my
duty, and I am content to wait to know the rest."

"Content, too, to live in palaces, and eat from fine linen," said the
Huguenot bitterly, "when the hands of the wicked are heavy upon your
kinsfolk, and there is a breaking of phials, and a pouring forth of
tribulation, and a wailing and a weeping throughout the land."

"What is amiss, then?" asked the young soldier, who was somewhat
mystified by the scriptural language in use among the French Calvinists
of the day.

"Twenty men of Moab have been quartered upon me, with one Dalbert, their
captain, who has long been a scourge to Israel."

"Captain Claude Dalbert, of the Languedoc Dragoons?  I have already some
small score to settle with him."

"Ay, and the scattered remnant has also a score against this murderous
dog and self-seeking Ziphite."

"What has he done, then?"

"His men are over my house like moths in a cloth bale.  No place is free
from them.  He sits in the room which should be mine, his great boots on
my Spanish leather chairs, his pipe in his mouth, his wine-pot at his
elbow, and his talk a hissing and an abomination.  He has beaten old
Pierre of the warehouse."

"Ha!"

"And thrust me into the cellar."

"Ha!"

"Because I have dragged him back when in his drunken love he would have
thrown his arms about your cousin Adele."

"Oh!"  The young man's colour had been rising and his brows knitted at
each successive charge, but at this last his anger boiled over, and he
hurried forward with fury in his face, dragging his elderly companion by
the elbow.  They had been passing through one of those winding paths,
bordered by high hedges, which thinned away every here and there to give
a glimpse of some prowling faun or weary nymph who slumbered in marble
amid the foliage.  The few courtiers who met them gazed with surprise at
so ill-assorted a pair of companions.  But the young soldier was too
full of his own plans to waste a thought upon their speculations.  Still
hurrying on, he followed a crescent path which led past a dozen stone
dolphins shooting water out of their mouths over a group of Tritons, and
so through an avenue of great trees which looked as if they had grown
there for centuries, and yet had in truth been carried over that very
year by incredible labour from St. Germain and Fontainebleau.  Beyond
this point a small gate led out of the grounds, and it was through it
that the two passed, the elder man puffing and panting with this unusual
haste.

"How did you come, uncle?"

"In a caleche."

"Where is it?"

"That is it, beyond the auberge."

"Come, let us make for it."

"And you, Amory, are you coming?"

"My faith, it is time that I came, from what you tell me.  There is room
for a man with a sword at his side in this establishment of yours."

"But what would you do?"

"I would have a word with this Captain Dalbert."

"Then I have wronged you, nephew, when I said even now that you were not
whole-hearted towards Israel."

"I know not about Israel," cried De Catinat impatiently.  "I only know
that if my Adele chose to worship the thunder like an Abenaqui squaw, or
turned her innocent prayers to the Mitche Manitou, I should like to set
eyes upon the man who would dare to lay a hand upon her.  Ha, here comes
our caleche! Whip up, driver, and five livres to you if you pass the
gate of the Invalides within the hour."

It was no light matter to drive fast in an age of springless carriages
and deeply rutted roads, but the driver lashed at his two rough
unclipped horses, and the caleche jolted and clattered upon its way.  As
they sped on, with the road-side trees dancing past the narrow windows,
and the white dust streaming behind them, the guardsman drummed his
fingers upon his knees, and fidgeted in his seat with impatience,
shooting an occasional question across at his grim companion.

"When was all this, then?"

"It was yesterday night."

"And where is Adele now?"

"She is at home."

"And this Dalbert?"

"Oh, he is there also!"

"What! you have left her in his power while you came away to
Versailles?"

"She is locked in her room."

"Pah! what is a lock?"  The young man raved with his hands in the air at
the thought of his own impotence.

"And Pierre is there?"

"He is useless."

"And Amos Green."

"Ah, that is better.  He is a man, by the look of him."

"His mother was one of our own folk from Staten Island, near Manhattan.
She was one of those scattered lambs who fled early before the wolves,
when first it was seen that the king's hand waxed heavy upon Israel.
He speaks French, and yet he is neither French to the eye, nor are his
ways like our ways."

"He has chosen an evil time for his visit."

"Some wise purpose may lie hid in it."

"And you have left him in the house?"

"Yes; he was sat with this Dalbert, smoking with him, and telling him
strange tales."

"What guard could he be?  He is a stranger in a strange land.  You did
ill to leave Adele thus, uncle."

"She is in God's hands, Amory."

"I trust so.  Oh, I am on fire to be there!"

He thrust his head through the cloud of dust which rose from the wheels,
and craned his neck to look upon the long curving river and broad-spread
city, which was already visible before them, half hid by a thin blue
haze, through which shot the double tower of Notre Dame, with the high
spire of St. Jacques and a forest of other steeples and minarets, the
monuments of eight hundred years of devotion.  Soon, as the road curved
down to the river-bank, the city wall grew nearer and nearer, until they
had passed the southern gate, and were rattling over the stony causeway,
leaving the broad Luxembourg upon their right, and Colbert's last work,
the Invalides, upon their left.  A sharp turn brought them on to the
river quays, and crossing over the Pont Neuf, they skirted the stately
Louvre, and plunged into the labyrinth of narrow but important streets
which extended to the northward.  The young officer had his head still
thrust out of the window, but his view was obscured by a broad gilded
carriage which lumbered heavily along in front of them.  As the road
broadened, however, it swerved to one side, and he was able to catch a
glimpse of the house to which they were making.

It was surrounded on every side by an immense crowd.



CHAPTER VI.


A HOUSE OF STRIFE.

The house of the Huguenot merchant was a tall, narrow building standing
at the corner of the Rue St. Martin and the Rue de Biron.  It was four
stories in height, grim and grave like its owner, with high peaked roof,
long diamond-paned windows, a frame-work of black wood, with gray
plaster filling the interstices, and five stone steps which led up to
the narrow and sombre door.  The upper story was but a warehouse in
which the trader kept his stock, but the second and third were furnished
with balconies edged with stout wooden balustrades.  As the uncle and
the nephew sprang out of the caleche, they found themselves upon the
outskirts of a dense crowd of people, who were swaying and tossing with
excitement, their chins all thrown forwards and their gaze directed
upwards.  Following their eyes, the young officer saw a sight which left
him standing bereft of every sensation save amazement.

From the upper balcony there was hanging head downwards a man clad in
the bright blue coat and white breeches of one of the king's dragoons.
His hat and wig had dropped off, and his close-cropped head swung slowly
backwards and forwards a good fifty feet above the pavement.  His face
was turned towards the street, and was of a deadly whiteness, while his
eyes were screwed up as though he dared not open them upon the horror
which faced them.  His voice, however, resounded over the whole place
until the air was filled with his screams for mercy.

Above him, at the corner of the balcony, there stood a young man who
leaned with a bent back over the balustrades, and who held the dangling
dragoon by either ankle.  His face, however, was not directed towards
his victim, but was half turned over his shoulder to confront a group of
soldiers who were clustering at the long, open window which led out into
the balcony.  His head, as he glanced at them, was poised with a proud
air of defiance, while they surged and oscillated in the opening,
uncertain whether to rush on or to retire.

Suddenly the crowd gave a groan of excitement.  The young man had
released his grip upon one of the ankles, and the dragoon hung now by
one only, his other leg flapping helplessly in the air.  He grabbed
aimlessly with his hands at the wall and the wood-work behind him, still
yelling at the pitch of his lungs.

"Pull me up, son of the devil, pull me up!" he screamed.  "Would you
murder me, then?  Help, good people, help!"

"Do you want to come up, captain?" said the strong clear voice of the
young man above him, speaking excellent French, but in an accent which
fell strangely upon the ears of the crowd beneath.

"Yes, sacred name of God, yes!"

"Order off your men, then."

"Away, you dolts, you imbeciles!  Do you wish to see me dashed to
pieces?  Away, I say! Off with you!"

"That is better," said the youth, when the soldiers had vanished from
the window.  He gave a tug at the dragoon's leg as he spoke, which
jerked him up so far that he could twist round and catch hold of the
lower edge of the balcony.  "How do you find yourself now?" he asked.

"Hold me, for heaven's sake, hold me!"

"I have you quite secure."

"Then pull me up!"

"Not so fast, captain.  You can talk very well where you are."

"Let me up, sir, let me up!"

"All in good time.  I fear that it is inconvenient to you to talk with
your heels in the air."

"Ah, you would murder me!"

"On the contrary, I am going to pull you up."

"Heaven bless you!"

"But only on conditions."

"Oh, they are granted!  I am slipping!"

"You will leave this house--you and your men.  You will not trouble this
old man or this young girl any further.  Do you promise?"

"Oh yes; we shall go."

"Word of honour?"

"Certainly.  Only pull me up!"

"Not so fast.  It may be easier to talk to you like this.  I do not know
how the laws are over here.  Maybe this sort of thing is not permitted.
You will promise me that I shall have no trouble over the matter."

"None, none.  Only pull me up!"

"Very good.  Come along!"

He dragged at the dragoon's leg while the other gripped his way up the
balustrade until, amid a buzz of congratulation from the crowd, he
tumbled all in a heap over the rail on to the balcony, where he lay for
a few moments as he had fallen.  Then staggering to his feet, without a
glance at his opponent, he rushed, with a bellow of rage, through the
open window.

While this little drama had been enacted overhead, the young guardsman
had shaken off his first stupor of amazement, and had pushed his way
through the crowd with such vigour that he and his companion had nearly
reached the bottom of the steps.  The uniform of the king's guard was in
itself a passport anywhere, and the face of old Catinat was so well
known in the district that everyone drew back to clear a path for him
towards his house.  The door was flung open for them, and an old servant
stood wringing his hands in the dark passage.

"Oh, master! Oh, master!" he cried.

"Such doings, such infamy!  They will murder him!"

"Whom, then?"

"This brave monsieur from America.  Oh, my God, hark to them now!"

As he spoke, a clatter and shouting which had burst out again upstairs
ended suddenly in a tremendous crash, with volleys of oaths and a
prolonged bumping and smashing, which shook the old house to its
foundations.  The soldier and the Huguenot rushed swiftly up the first
flight of stairs, and were about to ascend the second one, from the head
of which the uproar seemed to proceed, when a great eight-day clock came
hurtling down, springing four steps at a time, and ending with a leap
across the landing and a crash against the wall, which left it a
shattered heap of metal wheels and wooden splinters.  An instant
afterwards four men, so locked together that they formed but one rolling
bundle, came thudding down amid a _debris_ of splintered stair-rails,
and writhed and struggled upon the landing, staggering up, falling down,
and all breathing together like the wind in a chimney.  So twisted and
twined were they that it was hard to pick one from the other, save that
the innermost was clad in black Flemish cloth, while the three who clung
to him were soldiers of the king.  Yet so strong and vigorous was the
man whom they tried to hold that as often as he could find his feet he
dragged them after him from end to end of the passage, as a boar might
pull the curs which had fastened on to his haunches.  An officer, who
had rushed down at the heels of the brawlers, thrust his hands in to
catch the civilian by the throat, but he whipped them back again with an
oath as the man's strong white teeth met in his left thumb.  Clapping
the wound to his mouth, he flashed out his sword and was about to drive
it through the body of his unarmed opponent, when De Catinat sprang
forward and caught him by the wrist.

"You villain, Dalbert!" he cried.

The sudden appearance of one of the king's own bodyguard had a magic
effect upon the brawlers.  Dalbert sprang back, with his thumb still in
his mouth, and his sword drooping, scowling darkly at the new-comer.
His long sallow face was distorted with anger, and his small black eyes
blazed with passion and with the hell-fire light of unsatisfied
vengeance.  His troopers had released their victim, and stood panting in
a line, while the young man leaned against the wall, brushing the dust
from his black coat, and looking from his rescuer to his antagonists.

"I had a little account to settle with you before, Dalbert," said
De Catinat, unsheathing his rapier.

"I am on the king's errand," snarled the other.

"No doubt.  On guard, sir!"

"I am here on duty, I tell you!"

"Very good.  Your sword, sir!"

"I have no quarrel with you."

"No?" De Catinat stepped forward and struck him across the face with his
open hand.  "It seems to me that you have one now," said he.

"Hell and furies!" screamed the captain.  "To your arms, men! _Hola_,
there, from above! Cut down this fellow, and seize your prisoner!
_Hola_!  In the king's name!"

At his call a dozen more troopers came hurrying down the stairs, while
the three upon the landing advanced upon their former antagonist.
He slipped by them, however, and caught out of the old merchant's hand
the thick oak stick which he carried.

"I am with you, sir," said he, taking his place beside the guardsman.

"Call off your canaille, and fight me like a gentleman," cried
De Catinat.

"A gentleman!  Hark to the bourgeois Huguenot, whose family peddles
cloth!"

"You coward!  I will write liar on you with my sword-point!"

He sprang forward, and sent in a thrust which might have found its way
to Dalbert's heart had the heavy sabre of a dragoon not descended from
the side and shorn his more delicate weapon short off close to the hilt.
With a shout of triumph, his enemy sprang furiously upon him with his
rapier shortened, but was met by a sharp blow from the cudgel of the
young stranger which sent his weapon tinkling on to the ground.  A
trooper, however, on the stair had pulled out a pistol, and clapping it
within a foot of the guardsman's head, was about to settle the combat,
once and forever, when a little old gentleman, who had quietly ascended
from the street, and who had been looking on with an amused and
interested smile at this fiery sequence of events, took a sudden step
forward, and ordered all parties to drop their weapons with a voice so
decided, so stern, and so full of authority, that the sabre points all
clinked down together upon the parquet flooring as though it were a part
of their daily drill.

"Upon my word, gentlemen, upon my word!" said he, looking sternly from
one to the other.  He was a very small, dapper man, as thin as a
herring, with projecting teeth and a huge drooping many-curled wig,
which cut off the line of his skinny neck and the slope of his narrow
shoulders.  His dress was a long overcoat of mouse-coloured velvet
slashed with gold, beneath which were high leather boots, which, with
his little gold-laced, three-cornered hat, gave a military tinge to his
appearance.  In his gait and bearing he had a dainty strut and backward
cock of the head, which, taken with his sharp black eyes, his high thin
features, and his assured manner, would impress a stranger with the
feeling that this was a man of power.  And, indeed, in France or out of
it there were few to whom this man's name was not familiar, for in all
France the only figure which loomed up as large as that of the king was
this very little gentleman who stood now, with gold snuff-box in one
hand, and deep-laced handkerchief in the other, upon the landing of the
Huguenot's house.  For who was there who did not know the last of the
great French nobles, the bravest of French captains, the beloved Conde,
victor of Recroy and hero of the Fronde?  At the sight of his pinched,
sallow face the dragoons and their leader had stood staring, while De
Catinat raised the stump of his sword in a salute.

"Heh, heh!" cried the old soldier, peering at him.

"You were with me on the Rhine--heh?  I know your face, captain.
But the household was with Turenne."

"I was in the regiment of Picardy, your Highness.  De Catinat is my
name."

"Yes, yes.  But you, sir, who the devil are you?"

"Captain Dalbert, your Highness, of the Languedoc Blue Dragoons."

"Heh! I was passing in my carriage, and I saw you standing on your head
in the air.  The young man let you up on conditions, as I understood."

"He swore he would go from the house," cried the young stranger.
"Yet when I had let him up, he set his men upon me, and we all came
downstairs together."

"My faith, you seem to have left little behind you," said Conde,
smiling, as he glanced at the litter which was strewed all over the
floor.  "And so you broke your parole, Captain Dalbert?"

"I could not hold treaty with a Huguenot and an enemy of the king," said
the dragoon sulkily.

"You could hold treaty, it appears, but not keep it.  And why did you
let him go, sir, when you had him at such a vantage?"

"I believed his promise."

"You must be of a trusting nature."

"I have been used to deal with Indians."

"Heh!  And you think an Indian's word is better than that of an officer
in the king's dragoons?"

"I did not think so an hour ago."

"Hem!" Conde took a large pinch of snuff, and brushed the wandering
grains from his velvet coat with his handkerchief of point.

"You are very strong, monsieur," said he, glancing keenly at the broad
shoulders and arching chest of the young stranger.  "You are from
Canada, I presume?"

"I have been there, sir.  But I am from New York."

Conde shook his head.  "An island?"

"No, sir; a town."

"In what province?"

"The province of New York."

"The chief town, then?"

"Nay; Albany is the chief town."

"And how came you to speak French?"

"My mother was of French blood."

"And how long have you been in Paris?"

"A day."

"Heh! And you already begin to throw your mother's country-folk out of
windows!"

"He was annoying a young maid, sir, and I asked him to stop, whereon he
whipped out his sword, and would have slain me had I not closed with
him, upon which he called upon his fellows to aid him.  To keep them
off, I swore that I would drop him over if they moved a step.  Yet when
I let him go, they set upon me again, and I know not what the end might
have been had this gentleman not stood my friend."

"Hem! You did very well.  You are young, but you have resource."

"I was reared in the woods, sir."

"If there are many of your kidney, you may give my friend De Frontenac
some work ere he found this empire of which he talks.  But how is this,
Captain Dalbert?  What have you to say?"

"The king's orders, your Highness."

"Heh!  Did he order you to molest the girl?  I have never yet heard that
his Majesty erred by being too _harsh_ with a woman."  He gave a little
dry chuckle in his throat, and took another pinch of snuff.

"The orders are, your Highness, to use every means which may drive these
people into the true Church."

"On my word, you look a very fine apostle and a pretty champion for a
holy cause," said Conde, glancing sardonically out of his twinkling
black eyes at the brutal face of the dragoon.  "Take your men out of
this, sir, and never venture to set your foot again across this
threshold."

"But the king's command, your Highness."

"I will tell the king when I see him that I left soldiers and that I
find brigands.  Not a word, sir!  Away!  You take your shame with you,
and you leave your honour behind."  He had turned in an instant from the
sneering, strutting old beau to the fierce soldier with set face and eye
of fire.  Dalbert shrank back from his baleful gaze, and muttering an
order to his men, they filed off down the stair with clattering feet and
clank of sabres.

"Your Highness," said the old Huguenot, coming forward and throwing open
one of the doors which led from the landing, "you have indeed been a
saviour of Israel and a stumbling-block to the froward this day.  Will
you not deign to rest under my roof, and even to take a cup of wine ere
you go onwards?"

Conde raised his thick eyebrows at the scriptural fashion of the
merchant's speech, but he bowed courteously to the invitation, and
entered the chamber, looking around him in surprise and admiration at
its magnificence.  With its panelling of dark shining oak, its polished
floor, its stately marble chimney-piece, and its beautifully moulded
ceiling, it was indeed a room which might have graced a palace.

"My carriage waits below," said he, "and I must not delay longer.  It is
not often that I leave my castle of Chantilly to come to Paris, and it
was a fortunate chance which made me pass in time to be of service to
honest men.  When a house hangs out such a sign as an officer of
dragoons with his heels in the air, it is hard to drive past without a
question.  But I fear that as long as you are a Huguenot, there will be
no peace for you in France, monsieur."

"The law is indeed heavy upon us."

"And will be heavier if what I hear from court is correct.  I wonder
that you do not fly the country."

"My business and my duty lie here."

"Well, every man knows his own affairs best.  Would it not be wise to
bend to the storm, heh?"

The Huguenot gave a gesture of horror.

"Well, well, I meant no harm.  And where is this fair maid who has been
the cause of the broil?"

"Where is Adele, Pierre?" asked the merchant of the old servant, who had
carried in the silver tray with a squat flask and tinted Venetian
glasses.

"I locked her in my room, master."

"And where is she now?"

"I am here, father."  The young girl sprang into the room, and threw her
arms round the old merchant's neck.  "Oh, I trust these wicked men have
not hurt you, love!"

"No, no, dear child; none of us have been hurt, thanks to his Highness
the Prince of Conde here."

Adele raised her eyes, and quickly drooped them again before the keen
questioning gaze of the old soldier.  "May God reward your Highness!"
she stammered.  In her confusion the blood rushed to her face, which was
perfect in feature and expression.  With her sweet delicate contour, her
large gray eyes, and the sweep of the lustrous hair, setting off with
its rich tint the little shell-like ears and the alabaster whiteness of
the neck and throat, even Conde, who had seen all the beauties of three
courts and of sixty years defile before him, stood staring in admiration
at the Huguenot maiden.

"Heh! On my word, mademoiselle, you make me wish that I could wipe forty
years from my account."  He bowed, and sighed in the fashion that was in
vogue when Buckingham came to the wooing of Anne of Austria, and the
dynasty of cardinals was at its height.

"France could ill spare those forty years, your Highness."

"Heh, heh!  So quick of tongue too?  Your daughter has a courtly wit,
monsieur."

"God forbid, your Highness! She is as pure and good--"

"Nay, that is but a sorry compliment to the court.  Surely,
mademoiselle, you would love to go out into the great world, to hear
sweet music, see all that is lovely, and wear all that is costly, rather
than look out ever upon the Rue St. Martin, and bide in this great dark
house until the roses wither upon your cheeks."

"Where my father is, I am happy at his side," said she, putting her two
hands upon his sleeve.  "I ask nothing more than I have got."

"And I think it best that you go up to your room again," said the old
merchant shortly, for the prince, in spite of his age, bore an evil name
among women.  He had come close to her as he spoke, and had even placed
one yellow hand upon her shrinking arm, while his little dark eyes
twinkled with an ominous light.

"Tut, tut!" said he, as she hastened to obey.  "You need not fear for
your little dove.  This hawk, at least, is far past the stoop, however
tempting the quarry.  But indeed, I can see that she is as good as she
is fair, and one could not say more than that if she were from heaven
direct.  My carriage waits, gentlemen, and I wish you all a very good
day!" He inclined his be-wigged head, and strutted off in his dainty,
dandified fashion.  From the window De Catinat could see him slip into
the same gilded chariot which had stood in his way as he drove from
Versailles.

"By my faith," said he, turning to the young American, "we all owe
thanks to the prince, but it seems to me, sir, that we are your debtors
even more.  You have risked your life for my cousin, and but for your
cudgel, Dalbert would have had his blade through me when he had me at a
vantage.  Your hand, sir! These are things which a man cannot forget."

"Ay, you may well thank him, Amory," broke in the old Huguenot, who had
returned after escorting his illustrious guest to the carriage.  "He has
been raised up as a champion for the afflicted, and as a helper for
those who are in need.  An old man's blessing upon you, Amos Green, for
my own son could not have done for me more than you, a stranger."

But their young visitor appeared to be more embarrassed by their thanks
than by any of his preceding adventures.  The blood flushed to his
weather-tanned, clear-cut face, as smooth as that of a boy, and yet
marked by a firmness of lip and a shrewdness in the keen blue eyes
which spoke of a strong and self-reliant nature.

"I have a mother and two sisters over the water," said he diffidently.

"And you honour women for their sake?"

"We always honour women over there.  Perhaps it is that we have so few.
Over in these old countries you have not learned what it is to be
without them.  I have been away up the lakes for furs, living for months
on end the life of a savage among the wigwams of the Sacs and the Foxes,
foul livers and foul talkers, ever squatting like toads around their
fires.  Then when I have come back to Albany where my folk then dwelt,
and have heard my sisters play upon the spinet and sing, and my mother
talk to us of the France of her younger days and of her childhood, and
of all that they had suffered for what they thought was right, then I
have felt what a good woman is, and how, like the sunshine, she draws
out of one's soul all that is purest and best."

"Indeed, the ladies should be very much obliged to monsieur, who is as
eloquent as he is brave," said Adele Catinat, who, standing in the open
door, had listened to the latter part of his remarks.

He had forgotten himself for the instant, and had spoken freely and with
energy.  At the sight of the girl, however, he coloured up again, and
cast down his eyes.

"Much of my life has been spent in the woods," said he, "and one speaks
so little there that one comes to forget how to do it.  It was for this
that my father wished me to stay some time in France, for he would not
have me grow up a mere trapper and trader."

"And how long do you stop in Paris?" asked the guardsman.

"Until Ephraim Savage comes for me."

"And who is he?"

"The master of the _Golden Rod_."

"And that is your ship?"

"My father's ship.  She has been to Bristol, is now  at Rouen, and then
must go to Bristol again.  When she comes back once more, Ephraim comes
to Paris for me, and it will be time for me to go."

"And how like you Paris?"

The young man smiled.  "They told me ere I came that it was a very
lively place, and truly from the little that I have seen this morning, I
think that it is the liveliest place that I have seen."

"By my faith," said De Catinat, "you came down those stairs in a very
lively fashion, four of you together with a Dutch clock as an
_avant-courier_, and a whole train of wood-work at your heels.  And you
have not seen the city yet?"

"Only as I journeyed through it yester-evening on my way to this house.
It is a wondrous place, but I was pent in for lack of air as I passed
through it.  New York is a great city.  There are said to be as many as
three thousand folk living there, and they say that they could send out
four hundred fighting-men, though I can scarce bring myself to believe
it.  Yet from all parts of the city one may see something of God's
handiwork--the trees, the green of the grass, and the shine of the sun
upon the bay and the rivers.  But here it is stone and wood, and wood
and stone, look where you will.  In truth, you must be very hardy people
to keep your health in such a place."

"And to us it is you who seem so hardy, with your life in the forest and
on the river," cried the young girl.  "And then the wonder that you can
find your path through those great wildernesses, where there is naught
to guide you."

"Well, there again! I marvel how you can find your way among these
thousands of houses.  For myself, I trust that it will be a clear night
to-night."

"And why?"

"That I may see the stars."

"But you will find no change in them."

"That is it.  If I can but see the stars, it will be easy for me to know
how to walk when I would find this house again.  In the daytime I can
carry a knife and notch the door-posts as I pass, for it might be hard
to pick up one's trail again, with so many folk ever passing over it."

De Catinat burst out laughing again.  "By my faith, you will find Paris
livelier than ever," said he, "if you blaze your way through on the
door-posts as you would on the trees of a forest.  But perchance it
would be as well that you should have a guide at first; so, if you have
two horses ready in your stables, uncle, our friend and I might shortly
ride back to Versailles together, for I have a spell of guard again
before many hours are over.  Then for some days he might bide with me
there, if he will share a soldier's quarters, and so see more than the
Rue St. Martin can offer.  How would that suit you, Monsieur Green?"

"I should be right glad to come out with you, if we may leave all here
in safety."

"Oh, fear not for that," said the Huguenot.  "The order of the Prince of
Conde will be as a shield and a buckler to us for many a day.  I will
order Pierre to saddle the horses."

"And I must use the little time I have," said the guardsman, as he
turned away to where Adele waited for him in the window.



CHAPTER VII.


THE NEW WORLD AND THE OLD.

The young American was soon ready for the expedition, but De Catinat
lingered until the last possible minute.  When at last he was able to
tear himself away, he adjusted his cravat, brushed his brilliant coat,
and looked very critically over the sombre suit of his companion.

"Where got you those?" he asked.

"In New York, ere I left."

"Hem!  There is naught amiss with the cloth, and indeed the sombre
colour is the mode, but the cut is strange to our eyes."

"I only know that I wish that I had my fringed hunting tunic and
leggings on once more."

"This hat, now.  We do not wear our brims flat like that.  See if I
cannot mend it."  He took the beaver, and looping up one side of the
brim, he fastened it with a golden brooch taken from his own shirt
front.  "There is a martial cock," said he, laughing, "and would do
credit to the King's Own Musketeers.  The black broad-cloth and silk
hose will pass, but why have you not a sword at your side?"

"I carry a gun when I ride out."

"_Mon Dieu_, you will be laid by the heels as a bandit!"

"I have a knife, too."

"Worse and worse!  Well, we must dispense with the sword, and with the
gun too, I pray!  Let me re-tie your cravat.  So!  Now if you are in the
mood for a ten-mile gallop, I am at your service."

They were indeed a singular contrast as they walked their horses
together through the narrow and crowded causeways of the Parisian
streets.  De Catinat, who was the older by five years, with his delicate
small-featured face, his sharply trimmed moustache, his small but
well-set and dainty figure, and his brilliant dress, looked the very
type of the great nation to which he belonged.

His companion, however, large-limbed and strong, turning his bold and
yet thoughtful face from side to side, and eagerly taking in all the
strange, new life amidst which he found himself, was also a type,
unfinished, it is true, but bidding fair to be the higher of the two.
His close yellow hair, blue eyes, and heavy build showed that it was the
blood of his father, rather than that of his mother, which ran in his
veins; and even the sombre coat and swordless belt, if less pleasing to
the eye, were true badges of a race which found its fiercest battles and
its most glorious victories in bending nature to its will upon the seas
and in the waste places of the earth.

"What is yonder great building?" he asked, as they emerged into a
broader square.

"It is the Louvre, one of the palaces of the king."

"And is he there?"

"Nay; he lives at Versailles."

"What!  Fancy that a man should have two such houses!"

"Two!  He has many more--St. Germain, Marly, Fontainebleau, Clugny."

"But to what end?  A man can but live at one at a time."

"Nay; he can now come or go as the fancy takes him."

"It is a wondrous building.  I have seen the Seminary of St. Sulpice at
Montreal, and thought that it was the greatest of all houses, and yet
what is it beside this?"

"You have been to Montreal, then?  You remember the fort?"

"Yes, and the Hotel Dieu, and the wooden houses in a row, and eastward
the great mill with the wall; but what do you know of Montreal?"

"I have soldiered there, and at Quebec, too.  Why, my friend, you are
not the only man of the woods in Paris, for I give you my word that I
have worn the caribou mocassins, the leather jacket, and the fur cap
with the eagle feather for six months at a stretch, and I care not how
soon I do it again,"

Amos Green's eyes shone with delight at finding that his companion and
he had so much in common, and he plunged into a series of questions
which lasted until they had crossed the river and reached the
south-westerly gate of the city.  By the moat and walls long lines of
men were busy at their drill.

"Who are those, then?" he asked, gazing at them with curiosity.

"They are some of the king's soldiers."

"But why so many of them?  Do they await some enemy?"

"Nay; we are at peace with all the world.  Worse luck!"

"At peace.  Why then all these men?"

"That they may be ready."

The young man shook his head in bewilderment.  "They might be as ready
in their own homes surely.  In our country every man has his musket in
his chimney corner, and is ready enough, yet he does not waste his time
when all is at peace."

"Our king is very great, and he has many enemies."

"And who made the enemies?"

"Why, the king, to be sure."

"Then would it not be better to be without him?"

The guardsman shrugged his epaulettes in despair.  "We shall both wind
up in the Bastille or Vincennes at this rate," said he.  "You must know
that it is in serving the country that he has made these enemies.  It is
but five years since he made a peace at Nimeguen, by which he tore away
sixteen fortresses from the Spanish Lowlands.  Then, also, he had laid
his hands upon Strassburg and upon Luxembourg, and has chastised the
Genoans, so that there are many who would fall upon him if they thought
that he was weak."

"And why has he done all this?"

"Because he is a great king, and for the glory of France."

The stranger pondered over this answer for some time as they rode on
between the high, thin poplars, which threw bars across the sunlit road.

"There was a great man in Schenectady once," said he at last.  "They are
simple folk up yonder, and they all had great trust in each other.  But
after this man came among them they began to miss--one a beaver-skin and
one a bag of ginseng, and one a belt of wampum, until at last old Pete
Hendricks lost his chestnut three-year-old.  Then there was a search and
a fuss until they found all that had been lost in the stable of the
new-comer, so we took him, I and some others, and we hung him up on a
tree, without ever thinking what a great man he had been."

De Catinat shot an angry glance at his companion.  "Your parable, my
friend, is scarce polite," said he.  "If you and I are to travel in
peace you must keep a closer guard upon your tongue."

"I would not give you offence, and it may be that I am wrong," answered
the American, "but I speak as the matter seems to me, and it is the
right of a free man to do that."

De Catinat's frown relaxed as the other turned his earnest blue eyes
upon him.  "By my soul, where would the court be if every man did that?"
said he.  "But what in the name of heaven is amiss now?"

His companion had hurled himself off his horse, and was stooping low
over the ground, with his eyes bent upon the dust.  Then, with quick,
noiseless steps, he zigzagged along the road, ran swiftly across a
grassy bank, and stood peering at the gap of a fence, with his nostrils
dilated, his eyes shining, and his whole face aglow with eagerness.

"The fellow's brain is gone," muttered De Catinat, as he caught at the
bridle of the riderless horse.  "The sight of Paris has shaken his wits.
What in the name of the devil ails you, that you should stand glaring
there?"

"A deer has passed," whispered the other, pointing down at the grass.
"Its trail lies along there and into the wood.  It could not have been
long ago, and there is no slur to the track, so that it was not going
fast.  Had we but fetched my gun, we might have followed it, and brought
the old man back a side of venison."

"For God's sake get on your horse again!" cried De Catinat distractedly.
"I fear that some evil will come upon you ere I get you safe to the Rue
St. Martin again!"

"And what is wrong now?" asked Amos Green, swinging himself into the
saddle.

"Why, man, these woods are the king's preserves and you speak as coolly
of slaying his deer as though you were on the shores of Michigan!"

"Preserves!  They are tame deer!"  An expression of deep disgust passed
over his face, and spurring his horse, he galloped onwards at such a
pace that De Catinat, after vainly endeavouring to keep up, had to
shriek to him to stop.

"It is not usual in this country to ride so madly along the roads," he
panted.

"It is a very strange country," cried the stranger, in perplexity.
"Maybe it would be easier for me to remember what _is_ allowed.  It was
but this morning that I took my gun to shoot a pigeon that was flying
over the roofs in yonder street, and old Pierre caught my arm with a
face as though it were the minister that I was aiming at.  And then
there is that old man--why, they will not even let him say his prayers."

De Catinat laughed.  "You will come to know our ways soon," said he.
"This is a crowded land, and if all men rode and shot as they listed,
much harm would come from it.  But let us talk rather of your own
country.  You have lived much in the woods from what you tell me."

"I was but ten when first I journeyed with my uncle to Sault la Marie,
where the three great lakes meet, to trade with the Chippewas and the
tribes of the west."

"I know not what La Salle or De Frontenac would have said to that.  The
trade in those parts belongs to  France."

"We were taken prisoners, and so it was that I came  to see Montreal and
afterwards Quebec.  In the end we were sent back because they did not
know what they could do with us."

"It was a good journey for a first."

"And ever since I have been trading--first, on the Kennebec with the
Abenaquis, in the great forests of Maine, and with the Micmac
fish-eaters over the Penobscot.  Then later with the Iroquois, as far
west as the country of the Senecas.  At Albany and Schenectady we stored
our pelts, and so on to New York, where my father shipped them over the
sea."

"But he could ill spare you surely?"

"Very ill.  But as he was rich, he thought it best that I should learn
some things that are not to be found in the woods.  And so he sent me in
the _Golden Rod_, under the care of Ephraim Savage."

"Who is also of New York?"

"Nay; he is the first man that ever was born at Boston."

"I cannot remember the names of all these villages."

"And yet there may come a day when their names shall be as well known
as that of Paris."

De Catinat laughed heartily.  "The woods may have given you much, but
not the gift of prophecy, my friend.  Well, my heart is often over the
water even as yours is, and I would ask nothing better than to see the
palisades of Point Levi again, even if all the Five Nations were raving
upon the other side of them.  But now, if you will look there in the gap
of the trees, you will see the king's new palace."

The two young men pulled up their horses, and looked down at the
wide-spreading building in all the beauty of its dazzling whiteness,
and at the lovely grounds, dotted with fountain and with statue, and
barred with hedge and with walk, stretching away to the dense woods
which clustered round them.  It amused De Catinat to watch the swift
play of wonder and admiration which flashed over his companion's
features.

"Well, what do you think of it?" he asked at last.

"I think that God's best work is in America, and man's in Europe."

"Ay, and in all Europe there is no such palace as that, even as there is
no such king as he who dwells within it."

"Can I see him, think you?"

"Who, the king? No, no; I fear that you are scarce made for a court."

"Nay, I should show him all honour."

"How, then? What greeting would you give him?"

"I would shake him respectfully by the hand, and ask as to his health
and that of his family."

"On my word, I think that such a greeting might please him more than the
bent knee and the rounded back, and yet, I think, my son of the woods,
that it were best not to lead you into paths where you would be lost, as
would any of the courtiers if you dropped them in the gorge of the
Saguenay.  But _hola_! what comes here? It looks like one of the
carriages of the court."

A white cloud of dust, which had rolled towards them down the road, was
now so near that the glint of gilding and the red coat of the coachman
could be seen breaking out through it.  As the two cavaliers reined
their horses aside to leave the roadway clear, the coach rumbled heavily
past them, drawn by two dapple grays, and the Horsemen caught a glimpse,
as it passed, of a beautiful but haughty face which looked out at them.
An instant afterwards a sharp cry had caused the driver to pull up his
horses, and a white hand beckoned to them through the carriage window.

"It is Madame de Montespan, the proudest woman in France," whispered
De Catinat.  "She would speak with us, so do as I do."

He touched his horse with the spur, gave a _gambade_ which took him
across to the carriage, and then, sweeping off his hat, he bowed to his
horse's neck; a salute in which he was imitated, though in a somewhat
ungainly fashion, by his companion.

"Ha, captain!" said the lady, with no very pleasant face, "we meet
again."

"Fortune has ever been good to me, madame."

"It was not so this morning."

"You say truly.  It gave me a hateful duty to perform."

"And you performed it in a hateful fashion."

"Nay, madame, what could I do more?"

The lady sneered, and her beautiful face turned as bitter as it could
upon occasion.

"You thought that I had no more power with the king.  You thought that
my day was past.  No doubt it seemed to you that you might reap favour
with the new by being the first to cast a slight upon the old."

"But, madame--"

"You may spare your protestations.  I am one who judges by deeds and not
by words.  Did you, then, think that my charm had so faded, that any
beauty which I ever have had is so withered?"

"Nay, madame, I were blind to think that."

"Blind as a noontide owl," said Amos Green with emphasis.

Madame de Montespan arched her eyebrows and glanced at her singular
admirer.  "Your friend at least speaks that which he really feels," said
she.  "At four o'clock to-day we shall see whether others are of the
same mind; and if they are, then it may be ill for those who mistook
what was but a passing shadow for a lasting cloud."  She cast another
vindictive glance at the young guardsman, and rattled on once more upon
her way.

"Come on!" cried De Catinat curtly, for his companion was staring
open-mouthed after the carriage.  "Have you never seen a woman before?"

"Never such a one as that."

"Never one with so railing a tongue, I dare swear," said De Catinat.

"Never one with so lovely a face.  And yet there is a lovely face at the
Rue St. Martin also."

"You seem to have a nice taste in beauty, for all your woodland
training."

"Yes, for I have been cut away from women so much that when I stand
before one I feel that she is something tender and sweet and holy."

"You may find dames at the court who are both tender and sweet, but you
will look long, my friend, before you find the holy one.  This one would
ruin me if she can, and only because I have done what it was my duty to
do.  To keep oneself in this court is like coming down the La Chine
Rapids where there is a rock to right, and a rock to left, and another
perchance in front, and if you so much as graze one, where are you and
your birch canoe?  But our rocks are women, and in our canoe we bear all
our worldly fortunes.  Now here is another who would sway me over to her
side, and indeed I think it may prove to be the better side too."

They had passed through the gateway of the palace, and the broad
sweeping drive lay in front of them, dotted with carriages and horsemen.
On the gravel walks were many gaily dressed ladies, who strolled among
the flower-beds or watched the fountains with the sunlight glinting upon
their high water sprays.  One of these, who had kept her eyes turned
upon the gate, came hastening forward the instant that De Catinat
appeared.  It was Mademoiselle Nanon, the _confidante_ of Madame de
Maintenon.

"I am so pleased to see you, captain," she cried, "and I have waited so
patiently.  Madame would speak with you.  The king comes to her at
three, and we have but twenty minutes.  I heard that you had gone to
Paris, and so I stationed myself here.  Madame has something which she
would ask you."

"Then I will come at once.  Ah, De Brissac, it is well met!"

A tall, burly officer was passing in the same uniform which De Catinat
wore.  He turned at once, and came smiling towards his comrade.

"Ah, Amory, you have covered a league or two from the dust on your
coat!"

"We are fresh from Paris.  But I am called on business.  This is my
friend, Monsieur Amos Green.  I leave him in your hands, for he is a
stranger from America, and would fain see all that you can show.
He stays with me at my quarters.  And my horse, too, De Brissac.
You can give it to the groom."

Throwing the bridle to his brother officer, and pressing the hand of
Amos Green, De Catinat sprang from his horse, and followed at the top of
his speed in the direction which the young lady had already taken.



CHAPTER VIII.


THE RISING SUN.

The rooms which were inhabited by the lady who had already taken so
marked a position at the court of France were as humble as were her
fortunes at the time when they were allotted to her, but with that rare
tact and self-restraint which were the leading features in her
remarkable character, she had made no change in her living with the
increase of her prosperity, and forbore from provoking envy and jealousy
by any display of wealth or of power.  In a side wing of the palace, far
from the central _salons_, and only to be reached by long corridors and
stairs, were the two or three small chambers upon which the eyes, first
of the court, then of France, and finally of the world, were destined to
be turned.  In such rooms had the destitute widow of the poet Scarron
been housed when she had first been brought to court by Madame de
Montespan as the governess of the royal children, and in such rooms she
still dwelt, now that she had added to her maiden Francoise d'Aubigny
the title of Marquise de Maintenon, with the pension and estate which
the king's favour had awarded her.  Here it was that every day the king
would lounge, finding in the conversation of a clever and virtuous woman
a charm and a pleasure which none of the professed wits of his sparkling
court had ever been able to give to him, and here, too, the more
sagacious of the courtiers were beginning to understand, was the point,
formerly to be found in the magnificent _salons_ of De Montespan, whence
flowed those impulses and tendencies which were so eagerly studied, and
so keenly followed up by all who wished to keep the favour of the king.
It was a simple creed, that of the court.  Were the king pious, then let
all turn to their missals and their rosaries.  Were he rakish, then who
so rakish as his devoted followers?  But woe to the man who was rakish
when he should be praying, or who pulled a long face when the king wore
a laughing one!  And thus it was that keen eyes were ever fixed upon
him, and upon every influence that came near him, so that the wary
courtier, watching the first subtle signs of a coming change, might so
order his conduct as to seem to lead rather than to follow.

The young guardsman had scarce ever exchanged a word with this powerful
lady, for it was her taste to isolate herself, and to appear with the
court only at the hours of devotion.  It was therefore with some
feelings both of nervousness and of curiosity that he followed his guide
down the gorgeous corridors, where art and wealth had been strewn with
so lavish a hand.  The lady paused in front of the chamber door, and
turned to her companion.

"Madame wishes to speak to you of what occurred this morning," said she.
"I should advise you to say nothing to madame about your creed, for it
is the only thing upon which her heart can be hard." She raised her
finger to emphasise the warning, and tapping at the door, she pushed it
open.  "I have brought Captain de Catinat, madame," said she.

"Then let the captain step in." The voice was firm, and yet sweetly
musical.

Obeying the command, De Catinat found himself in a room which was no
larger and but little better furnished than that which was allotted to
his own use.  Yet, though simple, everything in the chamber was
scrupulously neat and clean, betraying the dainty taste of a refined
woman.  The stamped-leather furniture, the La Savonniere carpet, the
pictures of sacred subjects, exquisite from an artist's point of view,
the plain but tasteful curtains, all left an impression half religious
and half feminine but wholly soothing.  Indeed, the soft light, the high
white statue of the Virgin in a canopied niche, with a perfumed red lamp
burning before it, and the wooden _prie-dieu_ with the red-edged
prayer-book upon the top of it, made the apartment look more like a
private chapel than a fair lady's boudoir.

On each side of the empty fireplace was a little green-covered
arm-chair, the one for madame and the other reserved for the use of the
king.  A small three-legged stool between them was heaped with her
work-basket and her tapestry.  On the chair which was furthest from the
door, with her back turned to the light, madame was sitting as the young
officer entered.  It was her favourite position, and yet there were few
women of her years who had so little reason to fear the sun, for a
healthy life and active habits had left her with a clear skin and
delicate bloom which any young beauty of the court might have envied.
Her figure was graceful and queenly, her gestures and pose full of a
natural dignity, and her voice, as he had already remarked, most sweet
and melodious.  Her face was handsome rather than beautiful, set in a
statuesque classical mould, with broad white forehead, firm, delicately
sensitive mouth, and a pair of large serene gray eyes, earnest and
placid in repose, but capable of reflecting the whole play of her soul,
from the merry gleam of humour to the quick flash of righteous anger.
An elevating serenity was, however, the leading expression of her
features, and in that she presented the strongest contrast to her rival,
whose beautiful face was ever swept by the emotion of the moment, and
who gleamed one hour and shadowed over the next like a corn-field in the
wind.  In wit and quickness of tongue it is true that De Montespan had
the advantage, but the strong common-sense and the deeper nature of the
elder woman might prove in the end to be the better weapon.  De Catinat,
at the moment, without having time to notice details, was simply
conscious that he was in the presence of a very handsome woman, and that
her large pensive eyes were fixed critically upon him, and seemed to be
reading his thoughts as they had never been read before.

"I think that I have already seen you, sir, have I not?"

"Yes, madame, I have once or twice had the honour of attending upon you
though it may not have been my good fortune to address you."

"My life is so quiet and retired that I fear that much of what is best
and worthiest at the court is unknown to me.  It is the curse of such
places that evil flaunts itself before the eye and cannot be overlooked,
while the good retires in its modesty, so that at times we scarce dare
hope that it is there.  You have served, monsieur?"

"Yes, madame.  In the Lowlands, on the Rhine, and in Canada."

"In Canada!  Ah!  What nobler ambition could woman have than to be a
member of that sweet sisterhood which was founded by the holy Marie de
l'Incarnation and the sainted Jeanne le Ber at Montreal?  It was but the
other day that I had an account of them from Father Godet des Marais.
What joy to be one of such a body, and to turn from the blessed work of
converting the heathen to the even more precious task of nursing back
health and strength into those of God's warriors who have been struck
down in the fight with Satan!"

It was strange to De Catinat, who knew well the sordid and dreadful
existence led by these same sisters, threatened ever with misery,
hunger, and the scalping-knife, to hear this lady at whose feet lay all
the good things of this earth speaking enviously of their lot.

"They are very good women," said he shortly, remembering Mademoiselle
Nanon's warning, and fearing to trench upon the dangerous subject.

"And doubtless you have had the privilege also of seeing the holy Bishop
Laval?"

"Yes, madame, I have seen Bishop Laval."

 "And I trust that the Sulpitians still hold their own against the
Jesuits?"

"I have heard, madame, that the Jesuits are the stronger at Quebec, and
the others at Montreal."

"And who is your own director, monsieur?"

De Catinat felt that the worst had come upon him.  "I have none,
madame."

"Ah, it is too common to dispense with a director, and yet I know not
how I could guide my steps in the difficult path which I tread if it
were not for mine.  Who is your confessor, then?"

"I have none.  I am of the Reformed Church, madame."

The lady gave a gesture of horror, and a sudden hardening showed itself
in mouth and eye.  "What, in the court itself," she cried, "and in the
neighbourhood of the king's own person!"

De Catinat was lax enough in matters of faith, and held his creed rather
as a family tradition than from any strong conviction, but it hurt his
self-esteem to see himself regarded as though he had confessed to
something that was loathsome and unclean.  "You will find, madame," said
he sternly, "that members of my faith have not only stood around the
throne of France, but have even seated themselves upon it."

"God has for His own all-wise purposes permitted it, and none should
know it better than I, whose grandsire, Theodore d'Aubigny, did so much
to place a crown upon the head of the great Henry.  But Henry's eyes
were opened ere his end came, and I pray--oh, from my heart I pray--that
yours may be also."

She rose, and throwing herself down upon the _prie-dieu_ sunk her face
in her hands for some few minutes, during which the object of her
devotions stood in some perplexity in the middle of the room, hardly
knowing whether such an attention should be regarded as an insult or as
a favour.  A tap at the door brought the lady back to this world again,
and her devoted attendant answered her summons to enter.

"The king is in the Hall of Victories, madame," said she.  "He will be
here in five minutes."

"Very well.  Stand outside, and let me know when he comes.  Now, sir,"
she continued, when they were alone once more, "you gave a note of mine
to the king this morning?"

"I did, madame."

"And, as I understand, Madame de Montespan was refused admittance to the
_grand lever_?"

"She was, madame."

"But she waited for the king in the passage?"

"She did."

"And wrung from him a promise that he would see her to-day?"

"Yes, madame."

"I would not have you tell me that which it may seem to you a breach of
your duty to tell.  But I am fighting now against a terrible foe, and
for a great stake.  Do you understand me?"

De Catinat bowed.

"Then what do I mean?"

"I presume that what madame means is that she is fighting for the king's
favour with the lady you mentioned."

"As heaven is my judge, I have no thought of myself.  I am fighting with
the devil for the king's soul."

"'Tis the same thing, madame."

The lady smiled.  "If the king's body were in peril, I could call on the
aid of his faithful guards, and not less so now, surely, when so much
more is at stake.  Tell me, then, at what hour was the king to meet the
marquise in her room?"

"At four, madame."

"I thank you.  You have done me a service, and I shall not forget it."

"The king comes, madame," said Mademoiselle Nanon, again protruding her
head.

"Then you must go, captain.  Pass through the other room, and so into
the outer passage.  And take this.  It is Bossuet's statement of the
Catholic faith.  It has softened the hearts of others, and may yours.
Now, adieu!"

De Catinat passed out through another door, and as he did so he glanced
back.  The lady had her back to him, and her hand was raised to the
mantel-piece.  At the instant that he looked she moved her neck, and he
could see what she was doing.  She was pushing back the long hand of the
clock.



CHAPTER IX.


LE ROI S'AMUSE.

Captain de Catinat had hardly vanished through the one door before the
other was thrown open by Mademoiselle Nanon, and the king entered the
room.  Madame de Maintenon rose with a pleasant smile and curtsied
deeply, but there was no answering light upon her visitor's face, and he
threw himself down upon the vacant arm-chair with a pouting lip and a
frown upon his forehead.

"Nay, now this is a very bad compliment," she cried, with the gaiety
which she could assume whenever it was necessary to draw the king from
his blacker humours.  "My poor little dark room has already cast a
shadow over you."

"Nay; it is Father la Chaise and the Bishop of Meaux who have been after
me all day like two hounds on a stag, with talk of my duty and my
position and my sins, with judgment and hell-fire ever at the end of
their exhortations."

"And what would they have your Majesty do?"

"Break the promise which I made when I came upon the throne, and which
my grandfather made before me.  They wish me to recall the Edict of
Nantes, and drive the Huguenots from the kingdom."

"Oh, but your Majesty must not trouble your mind about such matters."

"You would not have me do it, madame?"

"Not if it is to be a grief to your Majesty."

"You have, perchance, some soft feeling for the religion of your youth?"

"Nay, sire; I have nothing but hatred for heresy."

"And yet you would not have them thrust out?"

"Bethink you, sire, that the Almighty can Himself incline their hearts
to better things if He is so minded, even as mine was inclined.  May you
not leave it in His hands?"

"On my word," said Louis, brightening, "it is well  put.  I shall see if
Father la Chaise can find an answer to that.  It is hard to be
threatened with eternal flames because one will not ruin one's kingdom.
Eternal torment!  I have seen the face of a man who had been in the
Bastille, for fifteen years.  It was like a dreadful book, with a scar
or a wrinkle to mark every hour of that death in life.  But Eternity!"
He shuddered, and his eyes were filled with the horror of his thought.
The higher motives had but little power over his soul, as those about
him had long discovered, but he was ever ready to wince at the image of
the terrors to come.

"Why should you think of such things, sire?" said the lady, in her rich,
soothing voice.  "What have you to fear, you who have been the first son
of the Church?"

"You think that I am safe, then?"

"Surely, sire."

"But I have erred, and erred deeply.  You have yourself said as much."

"But that is all over, sire.  Who is there who is without stain?
You have turned away from temptation.  Surely, then, you have earned
your forgiveness."

"I would that the queen were living once more.  She would find me a
better man."

"I would that she were, sire."

"And she should know that it was to you that she owed the change.
Oh, Francoise, you are surely my guardian angel, who has taken bodily
form!  How can I thank you for what you have done for me?"  He leaned
forward and took her hand, but at the touch a sudden fire sprang into
his eyes, and he would have passed his other arm round her had she not
risen hurriedly to avoid the embrace.

"Sire!" said she, with a rigid face and one finger upraised.

"You are right, you are right, Francoise.  Sit down, and I will control
myself.  Still at the same tapestry, then!  My workers at the Gobelins
must look to their laurels."  He raised one border of the glossy roll,
while she, having reseated herself, though not without a quick
questioning glance at her companion, took the other end into her lap and
continued her work.

"Yes, sire.  It is a hunting scene in your forests at Fontainebleau.
A stag of ten tines, you see, and the hounds in full cry, and a gallant
band of cavaliers and ladies.  Has your Majesty ridden to-day?"

"No.  How is it, Francoise, that you have such a heart of ice?"

"I would it were so, sire.  Perhaps you have hawked, then?"

"No.  But surely no man's love has ever stirred you! And yet you have
been a wife."

"A nurse, sire, but never a wife.  See the lady in the park!  It is
surely mademoiselle.  I did not know that she had come up from Choisy."

But the king was not to be distracted from his subject.

"You did not love this Scarron, then?" he persisted.  "He was old, I
have heard, and as lame as some of his verses."

"Do not speak lightly of him, sire.  I was grateful to him; I honoured
him; I liked him."

"But you did not love him."

"Why should you seek to read the secrets of a woman's heart?"

"You did not love him, Francoise?"

"At least I did my duty towards him."

"Has that nun's heart never yet been touched by love then?"

"Sire, do not question me."

"Has it never--"

"Spare me, sire, I beg of you!"

"But I must ask, for my own peace hangs upon your answer."

"Your words pain me to the soul."

"Have you never, Francoise, felt in your heart some little flicker of
the love which glows in mine?"  He rose with his hands outstretched, a
pleading monarch, but she, with half-turned bead, still shrank away from
him.

"Be assured of one thing, sire," said she, "that even if I loved you as
no woman ever loved a man yet, I should rather spring from that window
on to the stone terraces beneath than ever by word or sign confess as
much to you."

"And why, Francoise?"

"Because, sire, it is my highest hope upon earth that I have been chosen
to lift up your mind towards loftier things--that mind the greatness and
nobility of which none know more than I."

"And is my love so base, then?"

"You have wasted too much of your life and of your thoughts upon woman's
love.  And now, sire, the years steal on and the day is coming when even
you will be called upon to give an account of your actions, and of the
innermost thoughts of your heart.  I would see you spend the time that
is left to you, sire, in building up the Church, in showing a noble
example to your subjects, and in repairing any evil which that example
may have done in the past."

The king sank back into his chair with a groan.  "Forever the same,"
said he.  "Why, you are worse than Father la Chaise and Bossuet."

"Nay, nay," said she gaily, with the quick tact in which she never
failed.  "I have wearied you, when you have stooped to honour my little
room with your presence.  That is indeed ingratitude, and it were a just
punishment if you were to leave me in solitude to-morrow, and so cut off
all the light of my day.  But tell me, sire, how go the works at Marly?
I am all on fire to know whether the great fountain will work."

"Yes, the fountain plays well, but Mansard has thrown the right wing too
far back.  I have made him a good architect, but I have still much to
teach him.  I showed him his fault on the plan this morning, and he
promised to amend it."

"And what will the change cost, sire?"

"Some millions of livres, but then the view will be much improved from
the south side.  I have taken in another mile of ground in that
direction, for there were a number of poor folk living there, and their
hovels were far from pretty."

"And why have you not ridden to-day, sire?"

"Pah! it brings me no pleasure.  There was a time when my blood was
stirred by the blare of the horn and the rush of the hoofs, but now it
is all wearisome to me."

"And hawking too?"

"Yes; I shall hawk no more."

"But, sire, you must have amusement."

"What is so dull as an amusement which has ceased to amuse?  I know not
how it is.  When I was but a lad, and my mother and I were driven from
place to place, with the Fronde at war with us and Paris in revolt, with
our throne and even our lives in danger, all life seemed to be so
bright, so new, and so full of interest.  Now that there is no shadow,
and that my voice is the first in France, as France's is in Europe, all
is dull and lacking in flavour.  What use is it to have all pleasure
before me, when it turns to wormwood when it is tasted?"

"True pleasure, sire, lies rather in the inward life, the serene mind,
the easy conscience.  And then, as we grow older, is it not natural that
our minds should take a graver bent?  We might well reproach ourselves
if it were not so, for it would show that we had not learned the lesson
of life."

"It may be so, and yet it is sad and weary when nothing amuses.  But who
is there?"

"It is my companion knocking.  What is it, mademoiselle?"

"Monsieur Corneille, to read to the king," said the young lady, opening
the door.

"Ah, yes, sire; I know how foolish is a woman's tongue, and so I have
brought a wiser one than mine here to charm you.  Monsieur Racine was to
have come, but I hear that he has had a fall from his horse, and he
sends his friend in his place.  Shall I admit him?"

"Oh, as you like, madame, as you like," said the king listlessly.  At a
sign from Mademoiselle Nanon a little peaky man with a shrewd petulant
face, and long gray hair falling back over his shoulders, entered the
room.  He bowed profoundly three times, and then seated himself
nervously on the very edge of the stool, from which the lady had removed
her work-basket.  She smiled and nodded to encourage the poet, while the
monarch leaned back in his chair with an air of resignation.

"Shall it be a comedy, or a tragedy, or a burlesque pastoral?" Corneille
asked timidly.

"Not the burlesque pastoral," said the king with decision.  "Such things
may be played, but cannot be read, since they are for the eye rather
than the ear."

The poet bowed his acquiescence.

"And not the tragedy, monsieur," said Madame de Maintenon, glancing up
from her tapestry.  "The king has enough that is serious in his graver
hours, and so I trust that you will use your talent to amuse him."

"Ay, let it be a comedy," said Louis; "I have not had a good laugh since
poor Moliere passed away."

"Ah, your Majesty has indeed a fine taste," cried the courtier poet.
"Had you condescended to turn your own attention to poetry, where should
we all have been then?"

Louis smiled, for no flattery was too gross to please him.

"Even as you have taught our generals war and our builders art, so you
would have set your poor singers a loftier strain.  But Mars would
hardly deign to share the humbler laurels of Apollo."

"I have sometimes thought that I had some such power," answered the king
complacently; "though amid my toils and the burdens of state I have had,
as you say, little time for the softer arts."

"But you have encouraged others to do what you could so well have done
yourself, sire.  You have brought out poets as the sun brings out
flowers.  How many have we not seen--Moliere, Boileau, Racine, one
greater than the other?  And the others, too, the smaller ones--Scarron,
so scurrilous and yet so witty--Oh, holy Virgin! what have I said?"

Madame had laid down her tapestry, and was staring in intense
indignation at the poet, who writhed on his stool under the stern rebuke
of those cold gray eyes.

"I think, Monsieur Corneille, that you had better go on with your
reading," said the king dryly.

"Assuredly, sire.  Shall I read my play about Darius?"

"And who was Darius?" asked the king, whose  education had been so
neglected by the crafty policy of Cardinal Mazarin that he was ignorant
of everything save what had come under his own personal observation.

"Darius was King of Persia, sire."

"And where is Persia?"

"It is a kingdom of Asia."

"Is Darius still king there?"

"Nay, sire; he fought against Alexander the Great."

"Ah, I have heard of Alexander.  He was a famous king and general, was
he not?"

"Like your Majesty, he both ruled wisely and led his armies
victoriously."

"And was King of Persia, you say?"

"No, sire; of Macedonia.  It was Darius who was King of Persia."

The king frowned, for the slightest correction was offensive to him.

"You do not seem very clear about the matter, and I confess that it does
not interest me deeply," said he.  "Pray turn to something else."

"There is my _Pretended Astrologer_."

"Yes, that will do."

Corneille commenced to read his comedy, while Madame de Maintenon's
white and delicate fingers picked among the many-coloured silks which
she was weaving into her tapestry.  From time to time she glanced
across, first at the clock and then at the king, who was leaning back,
with his lace handkerchief thrown over his face.  It was twenty minutes
to four now, but she knew that she had put it back half an hour, and
that the true time was ten minutes past.

"Tut! tut!" cried the king suddenly.  "There is something amiss there.
The second last line has a limp in it, surely."  It was one of his
foibles to pose as a critic, and the wise poet would fall in with his
corrections, however unreasonable they might be.

"Which line, sire?  It is indeed an advantage to have one's faults made
clear."

"Read the passage again."

         "Et si, quand je lui dis le secret de mon ame,
          Avec moins de rigueur elle eut traite ma flamme,
          Dans ma fayon de vivre, et suivant mon humeur,
          Une autre eut bientot le present de mon coeur."

"Yes, the third line has a foot too many.  Do you not remark it,
madame?"

"No; but I fear that I should make a poor critic."

"Your Majesty is perfectly right," said Corneille unblushingly.
"I shall mark the passage, and see that it is corrected."

"I thought that it was wrong.  If I do not write myself, you can see
that I have at least got the correct ear.  A false quantity jars upon
me.  It is the same in music.  Although I know little of the matter, I
can tell a discord where Lully himself would miss it.  I have often
shown him errors of the sort in his operas, and I have always convinced
him that I was right."

"I can readily believe it, your Majesty."  Corneille had picked up his
book again, and was about to resume his reading when there came a sharp
tap at the door.

"It is his Highness the minister, Monsieur de Louvois," said
Mademoiselle Nanon.

"Admit him," answered Louis.  "Monsieur Corneille, I am obliged to you
for what you have read, and I regret that an affair of state will now
interrupt your comedy.  Some other day perhaps I may have the pleasure
of hearing the rest of it."  He smiled in the gracious fashion which
made all who came within his personal influence forget his faults and
remember him only as the impersonation of dignity and of courtesy.

The poet, with his book under his arm, slipped out, while the famous
minister, tall, heavily wigged, eagle-nosed, and commanding, came bowing
into the little room.  His manner was that of exaggerated politeness,
but his haughty face marked only too plainly his contempt for such a
chamber and for the lady who dwelt there.  She was well aware of the
feeling with which he regarded her, but her perfect self-command
prevented her from ever by word or look returning his dislike.

"My apartments are indeed honoured to-day," said she, rising with
outstretched hand.  "Can monsieur condescend to a stool, since I have no
fitter seat to offer you in this little doll's house?  But perhaps I am
in the way, if you wish to talk of state affairs to the king.  I can
easily withdraw into my boudoir."

"No, no, nothing of the kind, madame," cried Louis.  "It is my wish that
you should remain here.  What is it, Louvois?"

"A messenger arrived from England with despatches, your Majesty,"
answered the minister, his ponderous figure balanced upon the
three-legged stool.  "There is very ill feeling there, and there is some
talk of a rising.  The letter from Lord Sunderland wished to know
whether, in case the Dutch took the side of the malcontents, the king
might look to France for help.  Of course, knowing your Majesty's mind,
I answered unhesitatingly that he might."

"You did what?"

"I answered, sire, that he might."

King Louis flushed with anger, and he caught up the tongs from the grate
with a motion as though he would have struck his minister with them.
Madame sprang from her chair, and laid her hand upon his arm with a
soothing gesture.  He threw down the tongs again, but his eyes still
flashed with passion as he turned them upon Louvois.

"How dared you?" he cried.

"But, sire--"

"How dared you, I say?  What! You venture to answer such a message
without consulting me!  How often am I to tell you that I am the state--
I alone; that all is to come from me; and that I am answerable to God
only?  What are you?  My instrument! my tool!  And you venture to act
without my authority!"

"I thought that I knew your wishes, sire," stammered Louvois, whose
haughty manner had quite deserted him, and whose face was as white as
the ruffles of his shirt.

"You are not there to think about my wishes, sir.  You are there to
consult them and to obey them.  Why is it that I have turned away from
my old nobility, and have committed the affairs of my kingdom to men
whose names have never been heard of in the history of France, such men
as Colbert and yourself?  I have been blamed for it.  There was the Duc
de St. Simon, who said, the last time that he was at the court, that it
was a bourgeois government.  So it is.  But I wished it to be so,
because I knew that the nobles have a way of thinking for themselves,
and I ask for no thought but mine in the governing of France.  But if my
bourgeois are to receive messages and give answers to embassies, then
indeed I am to be pitied.  I have marked you of late, Louvois.  You have
grown beyond your station.  You take too much upon yourself.  See to it
that I have not again to complain to you upon this matter."

The humiliated minister sat as one crushed, with his chin sunk upon his
breast.  The king muttered and frowned for a few minutes, but the cloud
cleared gradually from his face, for his fits of anger were usually as
short as they were fierce and sudden.

"You will detain that messenger, Louvois," he said at last, in a calm
voice.

"Yes, sire."

"And we shall see at the council meeting to-morrow that a fitting reply
be sent to Lord Sunderland.  It would be best perhaps not to be too free
with our promises in the matter.  These English have ever been a thorn
in our sides.  If we could leave them among their own fogs with such a
quarrel as would keep them busy for a few years, then indeed we might
crush this Dutch prince at our leisure.  Their last civil war lasted ten
years, and their next may do as much.  We could carry our frontier to
the Rhine long ere that.  Eh,  Louvois?"

"Your armies are ready, sire, on the day that you give the word."

"But war is a costly business.  I do not wish to have  to sell the court
plate, as we did the other day.  How  are the public funds?"

"We are not very rich, sire.  But there is one way in which money may
very readily be gained.  There was some talk this morning about the
Huguenots, and whether they should dwell any longer in this Catholic
kingdom.  Now, if they are driven out, and if their property were taken
by the state, then indeed your Majesty would at once become the richest
monarch in  Christendom."

"But you were against it this morning, Louvois?"

"I had not had time to think of it, sire."

"You mean that Father la Chaise and the bishop had not had time to get
at you," said Louis sharply.  "Ah, Louvois, I have not lived with a
court round me all these years without learning how things are done.
It is a word to him, and so on to another, and so to a third, and so to
the king.  When my good fathers of the Church have set themselves to
bring anything to pass, I see traces of them at every turn, as one
traces a mole by the dirt which it has thrown up.  But I will not be
moved against my own reason to do wrong to those who, however mistaken
they may be, are still the subjects whom God has given me."

"I would not have you do so, sire," cried Louvois in confusion.
The king's accusation had been so true that he had been unable at the
moment even to protest.

"I know but one person," continued Louis, glancing across at Madame de
Maintenon, "who has no ambitions, who desires neither wealth nor
preferment, and who can therefore never be bribed to sacrifice my
interests.  That is why I value that person's opinion so highly."
He smiled at the lady as he spoke, while his minister cast a glance at
her which showed the jealousy which ate into his soul.

"It was my duty to point this out to you, sire, not as a suggestion, but
as a possibility," said he, rising.  "I fear that I have already taken
up too much of your Majesty's time, and I shall now withdraw."  Bowing
slightly to the lady, and profoundly to the monarch, he walked from the
room.

"Louvois grows intolerable," said the king.  "I know not where his
insolence will end.  Were it not that he is an excellent servant, I
should have sent him from the court before this.  He has his own
opinions upon everything.  It was but the other day that he would have
it that I was wrong when I said that one of the windows in the Trianon
was smaller than any of the others.  It was the same size, said he.
I brought Le Metre with his measures, and of course the window was, as I
had said, too small.  But I see by your clock that it is four o'clock.
I must go."

"My clock, sire, is half an hour slow."

"Half an hour!"  The king looked dismayed for an instant, and then began
to laugh.  "Nay, in that case," said he, "I had best remain where I am,
for it is too late to go, and I can say with a clear conscience that it
was the clock's fault rather than mine."

"I trust that it was nothing of very great importance, sire," said the
lady, with a look of demure triumph in her eyes.

"By no means."

"No state affair?"

"No, no; it was only that it was the hour at which I had intended to
rebuke the conduct of a presumptuous person.  But perhaps it is better
as it is.  My absence will in itself convey my message, and in such a
sort that I trust I may never see that person's face more at my court.
But, ah, what is this?"

The door had been flung open, and Madame de Montespan, beautiful and
furious, was standing before them.



CHAPTER X.


AN ECLIPSE AT VERSAILLES.

Madame de Maintenon was a woman who was always full of self-restraint
and of cool resource.  She had risen in an instant, with an air as if
she had at last seen the welcome guest for whom she had pined in vain.
With a frank smile of greeting, she advanced with outstretched hand.

"This is indeed a pleasure," said she.

But Madame de Montespan was very angry, so angry that she was evidently
making strong efforts to keep herself within control, and to avoid
breaking into a furious outburst.  Her face was very pale, her lips
compressed, and her blue eyes had the set stare and the cold glitter of
a furious woman.  So for an instant they faced each other, the one
frowning, the other smiling, two of the most beautiful and queenly women
in France.  Then De Montespan, disregarding her rival's outstretched
hand, turned towards the king, who had been looking at her with a
darkening face.

"I fear that I intrude, sire."

"Your entrance, madame, is certainly somewhat abrupt."

"I must crave pardon if it is so.  Since this lady has been the
governess of my children I have been in the habit of coming into her
room unannounced."

"As far as I am concerned, you are most welcome to do so," said her
rival, with perfect composure.

"I confess that I had not even thought it necessary to ask your
permission, madame," the other answered coldly.

"Then you shall certainly do so in the future, madame," said the king
sternly.  "It is my express order to you that every possible respect is
to be shown in every way to this lady."

"Oh, to _this_ lady!" with a wave of her hand in her direction.  "Your
Majesty's commands are of course our laws.  But I must remember that it
_is_ this lady, for sometimes one may get confused as to which name it
is that your Majesty has picked out for honour.  To-day it is
De Maintenon; yesterday it was Fontanges;  to-morrow--Ah, well, who can
say who it may be to-morrow?"

She was superb in her pride and her fearlessness as she stood, with her
sparkling blue eyes and her heaving bosom, looking down upon her royal
lover.  Angry as he was, his gaze lost something of its sternness as it
rested upon her round full throat and the delicate lines of her shapely
shoulders.  There was something very becoming in her passion, in the
defiant pose of her dainty head, and the magnificent scorn with which
she  glanced at her rival.

"There is nothing to be gained, madame, by being insolent," said he.

"Nor is it my custom, sire."

"And yet I find your words so."

"Truth is always mistaken for insolence, sire, at the court of France."

"We have had enough of this."

"A very little truth is enough."

"You forget yourself, madame.  I beg that you will leave the room."

"I must first remind your Majesty that I was so far honoured as to have
an appointment this afternoon.  At four o'clock I had your royal promise
that you would come to me.  I cannot doubt that your Majesty will keep
that promise in spite of the fascinations which  you may find here."

"I should have come, madame, but the clock, as you may observe, is half
an hour slow, and the time had passed before I was aware of it."

I beg, sire, that you will not let that distress you.  I am returning to
my chamber, and five o'clock will suit me as well as four."

"I thank you, madame, but I have not found this interview so pleasant
that I should seek another."

"Then your Majesty will not come?"

"I should prefer not."

"In spite of your promise!"

"Madame!"

"You will break your word!"

"Silence, madame; this is intolerable."

"It is indeed intolerable!" cried the angry lady, throwing all
discretion to the winds.  "Oh, I am not afraid of you, sire.  I have
loved you, but I have never feared you.  I leave you here.  I leave you
with your conscience and your--your lady confessor.  But one word of
truth you shall hear before I go.  You have been false to your wife, and
you have been false to your mistress, but it is only now that I find
that you can be false also to your word." She swept him an indignant
courtesy, and glided, with head erect, out of the room.

The king sprang from his chair as if he had been stung.  Accustomed as
he was to his gentle little wife, and the even gentler La Valliere, such
language as this had never before intruded itself upon the royal ears.
It was like a physical blow to him.  He felt stunned, humiliated,
bewildered, by so unwonted a sensation.  What odour was this which
mingled for the first time with the incense amid which he lived?
And then his whole soul rose up in anger at her, at the woman who had
dared to raise her voice against him.  That she should be jealous of and
insult another woman, that was excusable.  It was, in fact, an indirect
compliment to himself.  But that she should turn upon him, as if they
were merely man and woman, instead of monarch and subject, that was too
much.  He gave an inarticulate cry of rage, and rushed to the door.

"Sire!"  Madame de Maintenon, who had watched keenly the swift play of
his emotions over his expressive face, took two quick steps forward, and
laid her hand upon his arm.

"I will go after her."

"And why, sire?"

To forbid her the court."

"But, sire--"

"You heard her!  It is infamous!  I shall go."

"But, sire, could you not write?"

"No, no; I shall see her." He pulled open the door.

"Oh, sire, be firm, then!"  It was with an anxious face that she watched
him start off, walking rapidly, with angry gestures, down the corridor.
Then she turned back, and dropping upon her knees on the _prie-dieu_,
bowed her head in prayer for the king, for herself, and for France.

De Catinat, the guardsman, had employed himself in showing his young
friend from over the water all the wonders of the great palace, which
the other had examined keenly, and had criticised or admired with an
independence of judgment and a native correctness of taste natural to a
man whose life had been spent in freedom amid the noblest works of
nature.  Grand as were the mighty fountains and the artificial cascades,
they had no overwhelming effect on one who had travelled up from Erie to
Ontario, and had seen the Niagara River hurl itself over its precipice,
nor were the long level swards so very large to eyes which had rested
upon the great plains of the Dakotas.  The building itself, however, its
extent, its height, and the beauty of its stone, filled him with
astonishment.

"I must bring Ephraim Savage here," he kept repeating.  "He Would never
believe else that there was one house in the world which would weigh
more than all Boston and New York put together."

De Catinat had arranged that the American should remain with his friend
Major de Brissac, as the time had come round for his own second turn of
guard.  He had hardly stationed himself in the corridor when he was
astonished to see the King, without escort or attendants, walking
swiftly down the passage.  His delicate face was disfigured with anger,
and his mouth was set grimly, like that of a man who had taken a
momentous resolution.

"Officer of the guard," said he shortly.

"Yes, sire."

"What! You again, Captain de Catinat?  You have not been on duty since
morning?"

"No, sire.  It is my second guard."

"Very good.  I wish your assistance."

"I am at your command, sire."

"Is there a subaltern here?"

"Lieutenant de la Tremouille is at the side guard."

"Very well.  You will place him in command."

"Yes, sire."

"You will yourself go to Monsieur de Vivonne.  You know his apartments?"

"Yes, sire."

"If he is not there, you must go and seek him.  Wherever he is, you must
find him within the hour."

"Yes, sire."

"You will give him an order from me.  At six o'clock he is to be in his
carriage at the east gate of the palace.  His sister, Madame de
Montespan, will await him there, and he is charged by me to drive her to
the Chateau of Petit Bourg.  You will tell him that he is answerable to
me for her arrival there."

"Yes, sire." De Catinat raised his sword in salute, and started upon his
mission.

The king passed on down the corridor, and opened a door which led him
into a magnificent ante-room, all one blaze of mirrors and gold,
furnished to a marvel with the most delicate ebony and silver suite, on
a deep red carpet of Aleppo, as soft and yielding as the moss of a
forest.  In keeping with the furniture was the sole occupant of this
stately chamber--a little negro boy in a livery of velvet picked out
with silver tinsel, who stood as motionless as a small swart statuette
against the door which faced that through which the king entered.

"Is your mistress there?"

"She has just returned, sire."

"I wish to see her."

"Pardon, sire, but she--"

"Is everyone to thwart me to-day?" snarled the king, and taking the
little page by his velvet collar, he hurled him to the other side of the
room.  Then, without knocking, he opened the door, and passed on into
the lady's boudoir.

It was a large and lofty room, very different to that from which he had
just come.  Three long windows from ceiling to floor took up one side,
and through the delicate pink-tinted blinds the evening sun cast a
subdued and dainty light.  Great gold candelabra glittered between the
mirrors upon the wall, and Le Brun had expended all his wealth of
colouring upon the ceiling, where Louis himself, in the character of
Jove, hurled down his thunder-bolts upon a writhing heap of Dutch and
Palatine Titans.  Pink was the prevailing tone in tapestry, carpet, and
furniture, so that the whole room seemed to shine with the sweet tints
of the inner side of a shell, and when lit up, as it was then, formed
such a chamber as some fairy hero might have built up for his princess.
At the further side, prone upon an ottoman, her face buried in the
cushion, her beautiful white arms thrown over it, the rich coils of her
brown hair hanging in disorder across the long curve of her ivory neck,
lay, like a drooping flower, the woman whom he had come to discard.

At the sound of the closing door she had glanced up, and then, at the
sight of the king, she sprang to her feet and ran towards him, her hands
out, her blue eyes bedimmed with tears, her whole beautiful figure
softening into womanliness and humility.

"Ah, sire," she cried, with a pretty little sunburst of joy through her
tears, "then I have wronged you!  I have wronged you cruelly!  You have
kept your promise.  You were but trying my faith!  Oh, how could I have
said such words to you--how could I pain that noble heart!  But you have
come after me to tell me that you have forgiven me!"  She put her arms
forward with the trusting air of a pretty child who claims an embrace as
her due, but the king stepped swiftly back from her, and warned her away
from him with an angry gesture.

"All is over forever between us," he cried harshly.  "Your brother will
await you at the east gate at six o'clock, and it is my command that you
wait there until you receive my further orders."

She staggered back as if he had struck her.

"Leave you!" she cried.

"You must leave the court."

"The court!  Ay, willingly, this instant!  But you!  Ah, sire, you ask
what is impossible."

"I do not ask, madame; I order.  Since you have learned to abuse your
position, your presence has become intolerable.  The united kings of
Europe have never dared to speak to me as you have spoken to-day.
You have insulted me in my own palace--me, Louis, the king.  Such things
are not done twice, madame.  Your insolence has carried you too far this
time.  You thought that because I was forbearing, I was therefore weak.
It appeared to you that if you only humoured me one moment, you might
treat me as if I were your equal the next, for that this poor puppet of
a king could always be bent this way or that.  You see your mistake now.
At six o'clock you leave Versailles forever."  His eyes flashed, and his
small upright figure seemed to swell in the violence of his indignation,
while she leaned away from him, one hand across her eyes and one thrown
forward, as if to screen her from that angry gaze.

"Oh, I have been wicked!" she cried.  "I know it, I know it!"

"I am glad, madame, that you have the grace to acknowledge it."

"How could I speak to you so!  How could I!  Oh, that some blight may
come upon this unhappy tongue!  I, who have had nothing but good from
you!  I to insult you, who are the author of all my happiness!  Oh,
sire, forgive me, forgive me! for pity's sake forgive me!"

Louis was by nature a kind-hearted man.  His feelings were touched, and
his pride also was flattered by the abasement of this beautiful and
haughty woman.  His other favourites had been amiable to all, but this
one was so proud, so unyielding, until she felt his master-hand.
His face softened somewhat in its expression as he glanced at her, but
he shook his head, and his voice was as firm as ever as he answered.

"It is useless, madame," said he.  "I have thought this matter over for
a long time, and your madness to-day has only hurried what must in any
case have taken place.  You must leave the palace."

"I will leave the palace.  Say only that you forgive me.  Oh, sire, I
cannot bear your anger.  It crushes me down.  I am not strong enough.
It is not banishment, it is death to which you sentence me.  Think of
our long years of love, sire, and say that you forgive me.  I have given
up all for your sake--husband, honour, everything.  Oh, will you not
give your anger up for mine?  My God, he weeps!  Oh, I am saved, I am
saved!"

"No, no, madame," cried the king, dashing his hand across his eyes.
"You see the weakness of the man, but you shall also see the firmness of
the king.  As to your insults to-day, I forgive them freely, if that
will make you more happy in your retirement.  But I owe a duty to my
subjects also, and that duty is to set them an example.  We have thought
too little of such things.  But a time has come when it is necessary to
review our past life, and to prepare for that which is to come."

"Ah, sire, you pain me.  You are not yet in the prime of your years, and
you speak as though old age were upon you.  In a score of years from now
it may be time for folk to say that age has made a change in your life."

The king winced.  "Who says so?" he cried angrily.

"Oh, sire, it slipped from me unawares.  Think no more of it.  Nobody
says so.  Nobody."

"You are hiding something from me.  Who is it who says this?"

"Oh, do not ask me, sire."

"You said that it was reported that I had changed my life not through
religion, but through stress of years.  Who said so?"

"Oh, sire, it was but foolish court gossip, all unworthy of your
attention.  It was but the empty common talk of cavaliers who had
nothing else to say to gain a smile from their ladies."

"The common talk?" Louis flushed crimson.

"Have I, then, grown so aged?  You have known me for nearly twenty
years.  Do you see such changes in me?"

"To me, sire, you are as pleasing and as gracious as when you first won
the heart of Mademoiselle Tonnay-Charente."

 The king smiled as he looked at the beautiful woman before him.

"In very truth," said he, "I can say that there has been no such great
change in Mademoiselle Tonnay-Charente either.  But still it is best
that we should part, Francoise."

"If it will add aught to your happiness, sire, I shall go through it, be
it to my death."

"Now that is the proper spirit."

"You have but to name the place, sire--Petit Bourg, Chargny, or my own
convent of St. Joseph in the Faubourg St. Germain.  What matter where
the flower withers, when once the sun has forever turned from it?
At least, the past is my own, and I shall live in the remembrance of the
days when none had come between us, and when your sweet love was all my
own.  Be happy, sire, be happy, and think no more of what I said about
the foolish gossip of the court.  Your life lies in the future.  Mine is
in the past.  Adieu, dear sire, adieu!"  She threw forward her hands,
her eyes dimmed over, and she would have fallen had Louis not sprung
forward and caught her in his arms.  Her beautiful head drooped upon his
shoulder, her breath was warm upon his cheek, and the subtle scent of
her hair was in his nostrils.  His arm, as he held her, rose and fell
with her bosom, and he felt her heart, beneath his hand, fluttering like
a caged bird.  Her broad white throat was thrown back, her eyes almost
closed, her lips just parted enough to show the line of pearly teeth,
her beautiful face not three inches from his own.  And then suddenly the
eyelids quivered, and the great blue eyes looked up at him, lovingly,
appealingly, half deprecating, half challenging, her whole soul in a
glance.  Did he move? or was it she?  Who could tell?  But their lips
had met in a long kiss, and then in another, and plans and resolutions
were streaming away from Louis like autumn leaves in the west wind.

"Then I am not to go?  You would not have the heart to send me away,
would you?"

"No, no; but you must not annoy me, Francoise."

"I had rather die than cause you an instant of grief.  Oh, sire, I have
seen so little of you lately!  And I love you so!  It has maddened me.
And then that dreadful woman--"

"Who, then?"

"Oh, I must not speak against her.  I will be civil for your sake even
to her, the widow of old Scarron."

"Yes, yes, you must be civil.  I cannot have any unpleasantness."

"But you will stay with me, sire?"  Her supple arms coiled themselves
round his neck.  Then she held him for an instant at arm's length to
feast her eyes upon his face, and then drew him once more towards her.
"You will not leave me, dear sire.  It is so long since you have been
here."

The sweet face, the pink glow in the room, the hush of the evening, all
seemed to join in their sensuous influence.  Louis sank down upon the
settee.

"I will stay," said he.

"And that carriage, dear sire, at the east door?"

"I have been very harsh with you, Francoise.  You  will forgive me.
Have you paper and pencil, that I may countermand the order?"

"They are here, sire, upon the side table.  I have also a note which, if
I may leave you for an instant, I will write in the anteroom."

She swept out with triumph in her eyes.  It had been a terrible fight,
but all the greater the credit of her victory.  She took a little pink
slip of paper from an inlaid desk, and dashed off a few words upon it.
They were: "Should Madame de Maintenon have any message for his Majesty,
he will be for the next few hours in the room of Madame de Montespan."
This she addressed to her rival, and it was sent on the spot, together
with the king's order, by the hands of the little black page.



CHAPTER XI.


THE SUN REAPPEARS.

For nearly a week the king was constant to his new humour.  The routine
of his life remained unchanged, save that it was the room of the frail
beauty, rather than of Madame de Maintenon, which attracted him in the
afternoon.  And in sympathy with this sudden relapse into his old life,
his coats lost something of their sombre hue, and fawn-colour,
buff-colour, and lilac began to replace the blacks and the blues.
A little gold lace budded out upon his hats also and at the trimmings of
his pockets, while for three days on end his _prie-dieu_ at the royal
chapel had been unoccupied.  His walk was brisker, and he gave a
youthful flourish to his cane as a defiance to those who had seen in his
reformation the first symptoms of age.  Madame had known her man well
when she threw out that artful insinuation.

And as the king brightened, so all the great court brightened too.
The _salons_ began to resume their former splendour, and gay coats and
glittering embroidery which had lain in drawers for years were seen once
more in the halls of the palace.  In the chapel, Bourdaloue preached in
vain to empty benches, but a ballet in the grounds was attended by the
whole court, and received with a frenzy of enthusiasm.  The Montespan
ante-room was crowded every morning with men and women who had some suit
to be urged, while her rival's chambers were as deserted as they had
been before the king first turned a gracious look upon her.  Faces which
had been long banished the court began to reappear in the corridors and
gardens unchecked and unrebuked, while the black cassock of the Jesuit
and the purple soutane of the bishop were less frequent colours in the
royal circle.

But the Church party, who, if they were the champions of bigotry, were
also those of virtue, were never seriously alarmed at this relapse.
The grave eyes of priest or of prelate followed Louis in his escapade as
wary huntsmen might watch a young deer which gambols about in the meadow
under the impression that it is masterless, when every gap and path is
netted, and it is in truth as much in their hands as though it were
lying bound before them.  They knew how short a time it would be before
some ache, some pain, some chance word, would bring his mortality home
to him again, and envelop him once more in those superstitious terrors
which took the place of religion in his mind.  They waited, therefore,
and they silently planned how the prodigal might best be dealt with on
his return.

To this end it was that his confessor, Pere la Chaise, and Bossuet, the
great Bishop of Meaux, waited one morning upon Madame de Maintenon in
her chamber.  With a globe beside her, she was endeavouring to teach
geography to the lame Due du Maine and the mischievous little Comte de
Toulouse, who had enough of their father's disposition to make them
averse to learning, and of their mother's to cause them to hate any
discipline or restraint.  Her wonderful tact, however, and her
unwearying patience had won the love and confidence even of these little
perverse princes, and it was one of Madame de Montespan's most bitter
griefs that not only her royal lover, but even her own children, turned
away from the brilliancy and riches of her salon to pass their time in
the modest apartment of her rival.

Madame de Maintenon dismissed her two pupils, and received the
ecclesiastics with the mixture of affection and respect which was due to
those who were not only personal friends, but great lights of the
Gallican Church.  She had suffered the minister Louvois to sit upon a
stool in her presence, but the two chairs were allotted to the priests
now, and she insisted upon reserving the humbler seat for herself.  The
last few days had cast a pallor over her face which spiritualised and
refined the features, but she wore unimpaired the expression of sweet
serenity which was habitual to her.

"I see, my dear daughter, that you have sorrowed," said Bossuet,
glancing at her with a kindly and yet searching eye.

"I have indeed, your Grace.  All last night I spent in prayer that this
trial may pass away from us."

"And yet you have no need for fear, madame--none, I assure you.  Others
may think that your influence has ceased; but we, who know the king's
heart, we think otherwise.  A few days may pass, a few weeks at the
most, and once more it will be upon your rising fortunes that every eye
in France will turn."

The lady's brow clouded, and she glanced at the prelate as though his
speech were not altogether to her taste.  "I trust that pride does not
lead me astray," she said.  "But if I can read my own soul aright, there
is no thought of myself in the grief which now tears my heart.  What is
power to me?  What do I desire?  A little room, leisure for my
devotions, a pittance to save me from want--what more can I ask for?
Why, then, should I covet power?  If I am sore at heart, it is not for
any poor loss which I have sustained.  I think no more of it than of the
snapping of one of the threads on yonder tapestry frame.  It is for the
king I grieve--for the noble heart, the kindly soul, which might rise so
high, and which is dragged so low, like a royal eagle with some foul
weight which ever hampers its flight.  It is for him and for France that
my days are spent in sorrow and my nights upon my knees."

"For all that, my daughter, you are ambitious."

It was the Jesuit who had spoken.  His voice was clear and cold, and his
piercing gray eyes seemed to read into the depths of her soul.

"You may be right, father.  God guard me from self-esteem.  And yet I do
not think that I am.  The king, in his goodness, has offered me titles--
I have refused them; money--I have returned it.  He has deigned to ask
my advice in matters of state, and I have withheld it.  Where, then, is
my ambition?"

"In your heart, my daughter.  But it is not a sinful ambition.  It is
not an ambition of this world.  Would you not love to turn the king
towards good?"

"I would give my life for it."

"And there is your ambition.  Ah, can I not read your noble soul?
Would you not love to see the Church reign pure and serene over all this
realm--to see the poor housed, the needy helped, the wicked turned from
their ways, and the king ever the leader in all that is noble and good?
Would you not love that, my daughter?"

Her cheeks had flushed, and her eyes shone as she looked at the gray
face of the Jesuit, and saw the picture which his words had conjured up
before her.  "Ah, that would be joy indeed!" she cried.

"And greater joy still to know, not from the mouths of the people, but
from the voice of your own heart in the privacy of your chamber, that
you had been the cause of it, that your influence had brought this
blessing upon the king and upon the country."

"I would die to do it."

"We wish you to do what may be harder.  We wish you to live to do it."

"Ah!" She glanced from one to the other with questioning eyes.

"My daughter," said Bossuet solemnly, leaning forward, with his broad
white hand outstretched and his purple pastoral ring sparkling in the
sunlight, "it is time for plain speaking.  It is in the interests of the
Church that we do it.  None hear, and none shall ever hear, what passes
between us now.  Regard us, if you will, as two confessors, with whom
your secret is inviolable.  I call it a secret, and yet it is none to
us, for it is our mission to read the human heart.  You love the king."

"Your Grace!" She started, and a warm blush, mantling up in her pale
cheeks, deepened and spread until it tinted her white forehead and her
queenly neck.

"You love the king."

"Your Grace--father!" She turned in confusion from one to the other.

"There is no shame in loving, my daughter.  The shame lies only in
yielding to love.  I say again that you love the king."

"At least I have never told him so," she faltered.

"And will you never?"

"May heaven wither my tongue first!"

"But consider, my daughter.  Such love in a soul like yours is heaven's
gift, and sent for some wise purpose.  This human love is too often but
a noxious weed which blights the soil it grows in, but here it is a
gracious flower, all fragrant with humility and virtue."

"Alas! I have tried to tear it from my heart."

"Nay; rather hold it firmly rooted there.  Did the king but meet with
some tenderness from you, some sign that his own affection met with an
answer from your heart, it might be that this ambition which you profess
would be secured, and that Louis, strengthened by the intimate
companionship of your noble nature, might live in the spirit as well as
in the forms of the Church.  All this might spring from the love which
you hide away as though it bore the brand of shame."

The lady half rose, glancing from the prelate to the priest with eyes
which had a lurking horror in their depths.

"Can I have understood you!" she gasped.  "What meaning lies behind
these words?  You cannot counsel me to--"

The Jesuit had risen, and his spare figure towered above her.

"My daughter, we give no counsel which is unworthy of our office.
We speak for the interests of Holy Church, and those interests demand
that you should marry the king."

"Marry the king!" The little room swam round her.  "Marry the king!"

"There lies the best hope for the future.  We see in you a second Jeanne
d'Arc, who will save both France and France's king."

Madame sat silent for a few moments.  Her face had regained its
composure, and her eyes were bent vacantly upon her tapestry frame as
she turned over in her mind all that was involved in the suggestion.

"But surely--surely this could never be," she said at last, "Why should
we plan that which can never come to pass?"

"And why?"

"What King of France has married a subject?  See how every princess of
Europe stretches out her hand to him.  The Queen of France must be of
queenly blood, even as the last was."

"All this may be overcome."

"And then there are the reasons of state.  If the king marry, it should
be to form a powerful alliance, to cement a friendship with a neighbour
nation, or to gain some province which may be the bride's dowry.
What is my dowry?  A widow's pension and a work-box."  She laughed
bitterly, and yet glanced eagerly at her companions, as one who wished
to be confuted.

"Your dowry, my daughter, would be those gifts of body and of mind with
which heaven has endowed you.  The king has money enough, and the king
has provinces enough.  As to the state, how can the state be better
served than by the assurance that the king will be saved in future from
such sights as are to be seen in this  palace to-day?"

"Oh, if it could be so!  But think, father, think of those about him--
the dauphin, monsieur his brother, his ministers.  You know how little
this would please them, and how easy it is for them to sway his mind.
No, no;  it is a dream, father, and it can never be."

The faces of the two ecclesiastics, who had dismissed her other
objections with a smile and a wave, clouded over at this, as though she
had at last touched upon the real obstacle.

"My daughter," said the Jesuit gravely, "that is a matter which you may
leave to the Church.  It may be that we, too, have some power over the
king's mind, and that we may lead him in the right path, even though
those of his own blood would fain have it otherwise.  The future only
can show with whom the power lies.  But you?  Love and duty both draw
you one way now, and the Church may count upon you."

"To my last breath, father."

"And you upon the Church.  It will serve you, if you in turn will but
serve it."

"What higher wish could I have?"

"You will be our daughter, our queen, our champion, and you will heal
the wounds of the suffering Church."

"Ah! if I could!"

"But you can.  While there is heresy within the land there can be no
peace or rest for the faithful.  It is the speck of mould which will in
time, if it be not pared off, corrupt the whole fruit."

"What would you have, then, father?"

"The Huguenots must go.  They must be driven forth.  The goats must be
divided from the sheep.  The king is already in two minds.  Louvois is
our friend now.  If you are with us, then all will be well."

"But, father, think how many there are!"

"The more reason that they should be dealt with."

"And think, too, of their sufferings should they be driven forth."

"Their cure lies in their own hands."

"That is true.  And yet my heart softens for them."

Pere la Chaise and the bishop shook their heads.  Nature had made them
both kind and charitable men, but the heart turns to flint when the
blessing of religion is changed to the curse of sect.

"You would befriend God's enemies then?"

"No, no; not if they are indeed so."

"Can you doubt it?  Is it possible that your heart still turns towards
the heresy of your youth?"

"No, father; but it is not in nature to forget that my father and my
grandfather--"

"Nay, they have answered for their own sins.  Is it possible that the
Church has been mistaken in you?  Do you then refuse the first favour
which she asks of you?  You would accept her aid, and yet you would give
none in return."

Madame de Maintenon rose with the air of one who has made her
resolution.  "You are wiser than I," said she, "and to you have been
committed the interests of the Church.  I will do what you advise."

"You promise it?"

"I do."

Her two visitors threw up their hands together.  "It is a blessed day,"
they cried, "and generations yet unborn will learn to deem it so."

She sat half stunned by the prospect which was opening out in front of
her.  Ambitious she had, as the Jesuit had surmised, always been--
ambitious for the power which would enable her to leave the world better
than she found it.  And this ambition she had already to some extent
been able to satisfy, for more than once she had swayed both king and
kingdom.  But to marry the king--to marry the man for whom she would
gladly lay down her life, whom in the depths of her heart she loved in
as pure and as noble a fashion as woman ever yet loved man--that was
indeed a thing above her utmost hopes.  She knew her own mind, and she
knew his.  Once his wife, she could hold him to good, and keep every
evil influence away from him.  She was sure of it.  She should be no
weak Maria Theresa, but rather, as the priest had said, a new Jeanne
d'Arc, come to lead France and France's king into better ways.  And if,
to gain this aim, she had to harden her heart against the Huguenots, at
least the fault, if there were one, lay with those who made this
condition rather than with herself.  The king's wife!  The heart of the
woman and the soul of the enthusiast both leaped at the thought.

But close at the heels of her joy there came a sudden revulsion to doubt
and despondency.  Was not all this fine prospect a mere day-dream? and
how could these men be so sure that they held the king in the hollow of
their hand?  The Jesuit read the fears which dulled the sparkle of her
eyes, and answered her thoughts before she had time to put them into
words.

"The Church redeems its pledges swiftly," said he.  "And you, my
daughter, you must be as prompt when your own turn comes."

"I have promised, father."

"Then it is for us to perform.  You will remain in your room all
evening."

"Yes, father."

"The king already hesitates.  I spoke with him this morning, and his
mind was full of blackness and despair.  His better self turns in
disgust from his sins, and it is now when the first hot fit of
repentance is just coming upon him that he may best be moulded to our
ends.  I have to see and speak with him once more, and I go from your
room to his.  And when I have spoken, he will come from his room to
yours, or I have studied his heart for twenty years in vain.  We leave
you now, and you will not see us, but you will see the effects of what
we do, and you will remember your pledge to us."  They bowed low to her
both together, and left her to her thoughts.

An hour passed, and then a second one, as she sat in her _fauteuil_, her
tapestry before her, but her hands listless upon her lap, waiting for
her fate.  Her life's future was now being settled for her, and she was
powerless to turn it in one way or the other.  Daylight turned to the
pearly light of evening, and that again to dusk, but she still sat
waiting in the shadow.  Sometimes as a step passed in the corridor she
would glance expectantly towards the door, and the light of welcome
would spring up in her gray eyes, only to die away again into
disappointment.  At last, however, there came a quick sharp tread, crisp
and authoritative, which brought her to her feet with flushed cheeks and
her heart beating wildly.  The door opened, and she saw outlined against
the gray light of the outer passage the erect and graceful figure of the
king.

"Sire!  One instant, and mademoiselle will light the lamp."

"Do not call her."  He entered and closed the door behind him.
"Francoise, the dusk is welcome to me, because it screens me from the
reproaches which must lie in your glance, even if your tongue be too
kindly to speak them."

"Reproaches, sire!  God forbid that I should utter them!"

"When I last left you, Francoise, it was with a good resolution in my
mind.  I tried to carry it out, and I failed--I failed.  I remember that
you warned me.  Fool that I was not to follow your advice!"

"We are all weak and mortal, sire.  Who has not fallen?  Nay, sire, it
goes to my heart to see you thus."

He was standing by the fireplace, his face buried in his hands, and she
could tell by the catch of his breath that he was weeping.  All the pity
of her woman's nature went out to that silent and repenting figure dimly
seen in the failing light.  She put out her hand with a gesture of
sympathy, and it rested for an instant upon his velvet sleeve.  The next
he had clasped it between his own, and she made no effort to release it.

"I cannot do without you, Francoise," he cried.  "I am the loneliest man
in all this world, like one who lives on a great mountain-peak, with
none to bear him company.  Who have I for a friend?  Whom can I rely
upon?  Some are for the Church; some are for their families; most are
for themselves.  But who of them all is single-minded?  You are my
better self, Francoise;  you are my guardian angel.  What the good
father says is true, and the nearer I am to you the further am I from
all that is evil.  Tell me, Francoise, do you love me?"

"I have loved you for years, sire."  Her voice was low but clear--the
voice of a woman to whom coquetry was abhorrent.

"I had hoped it, Francoise, and yet it thrills me to hear you say it.
I know that wealth and title have no attraction for you, and that your
heart turns rather towards the convent than the palace.  Yet I ask you
to remain in the palace, and to reign there.  Will you be my wife,
Francoise?"

And so the moment had in very truth come.  She paused for an instant,
only an instant, before taking this last great step; but even that was
too long for the patience of the king.

"Will you not, Francoise?" he cried, with a ring of fear in his voice.

"May God make me worthy of such an honour, sire!" said she.  "And here I
swear that if heaven double my life, every hour shall be spent in the
one endeavour to make you a happier man!"

She had knelt down, and the king, still holding her hand, knelt down
beside her.

"And I swear too," he cried, "that if my days also are doubled, you will
now and forever be the one and only woman for me."

And so their double oath was taken, an oath which was to be tested in
the future, for each did live almost double their years, and yet neither
broke the promise made hand in hand on that evening in the shadow-girt
chamber.



CHAPTER XII.


THE KING RECEIVES.

It may have been that Mademoiselle Nanon, the faithful _confidante_ of
Madame de Maintenon, had learned something of this interview, or it may
be that Pere la Chaise, with the shrewdness for which his Order is
famous, had come to the conclusion that publicity was the best means of
holding the king to his present intention; but whatever the source, it
was known all over the court next day that the old favourite was again
in disgrace, and that there was talk of a marriage between the king and
the governess of his children.  It was whispered at the _petit lever_,
confirmed at the _grand entree_, and was common gossip by the time that
the king had returned from chapel.  Back into wardrobe and drawer went
the flaring silks and the feathered hats, and out once more came the
sombre coat and the matronly dress.  Scudery and Calpernedi gave place
to the missal and St. Thomas a Kempis, while Bourdaloue, after preaching
for a week to empty benches, found his chapel packed to the last seat
with weary gentlemen and taper-bearing ladies.  By midday there was none
in the court who had not heard the tidings, save only Madame de
Montespan, who, alarmed by her lover's absence, had remained in haughty
seclusion in her room, and knew nothing of what had passed.  Many there
were who would have loved to carry her the tidings; but the king's
changes had been frequent of late, and who would dare to make a mortal
enemy of one who might, ere many weeks were past, have the lives and
fortunes of the whole court in the hollow of her hand?

Louis, in his innate selfishness, had been so accustomed to regard every
event entirely from the side of how it would affect himself, that it had
never struck him that his long-suffering family, who had always yielded
to him the absolute obedience which he claimed as his right, would
venture to offer any opposition to his new resolution.  He was
surprised, therefore, when his brother demanded a private interview that
afternoon, and entered his presence without the complaisant smile and
humble air with which he was wont to appear before him.

Monsieur was a curious travesty of his elder brother.  He was shorter,
but he wore enormously high boot-heels, which brought him to a fair
stature.  In figure he had none of that grace which marked the king, nor
had he the elegant hand and foot which had been the delight of
sculptors.  He was fat, waddled somewhat in his walk, and wore an
enormous black wig, which rolled down in rows and rows of curls over his
shoulders.  His face was longer and darker than the king's, and his nose
more prominent, though he shared with his brother the large brown eyes
which each had inherited from Anne of Austria.  He had none of the
simple and yet stately taste which marked the dress of the monarch, but
his clothes were all tagged over with fluttering ribbons, which rustled
behind him as he walked, and clustered so thickly over his feet as to
conceal them from view.  Crosses, stars, jewels, and insignia were
scattered broadcast over his person, and the broad blue ribbon of the
Order of the Holy Ghost was slashed across his coat, and was gathered at
the end into a great bow, which formed the incongruous support of a
diamond-hilted sword.  Such was the figure which rolled towards the
king, bearing in his right hand his many-feathered beaver, and
appearing in his person, as he was in his mind, an absurd burlesque of
the monarch.

"Why, monsieur, you seem less gay than usual to-day," said the king,
with a smile.  "Your dress, indeed, is bright, but your brow is clouded.
I trust that all is well with Madame and with the Duc de Chartres?"

"Yes, sire, they are well; but they are sad like myself, and from the
same cause."

"Indeed! and why?"

"Have I ever failed in my duty as your younger brother, sire?"

"Never, Philippe, never!" said the king, laying his hand affectionately
upon the other's shoulder.  "You have set an excellent example to my
subjects."

"Then why set a slight upon me?"

"Philippe!"

"Yes, sire, I say it is a slight.  We are of royal blood, and our wives
are of royal blood also.  You married the Princess of Spain; I married
the Princess of Bavaria.  It was a condescension, but still I did it.
My first wife was the Princess of England.  How can we admit into a
house which has formed such alliances as these a woman who is the widow
of a hunchback singer, a mere lampooner, a man whose name is a byword
through Europe?"

The king had stared in amazement at his brother, but his anger now
overcame his astonishment.

"Upon my word!" he cried; "upon my word!  I have said just now that you
have been an excellent brother, but I fear that I spoke a little
prematurely.  And so you take upon yourself to object to the lady whom I
select as my wife!"

"I do, sire."

"And by what right?"

"By the right of the family honour, sire, which is as much mine as
yours."

"Man," cried the king furiously, "have you not yet learned that within
this kingdom I am the fountain of honour, and that whomsoever I may
honour becomes by that very fact honourable?  Were I to take a
cinder-wench out of the Rue Poissonniere, I could at my will raise her
up until the highest in France would be proud to bow down before her.
Do you not know this?"

"No, I do not," cried his brother, with all the obstinacy of a weak man
who has at last been driven to bay.  "I look upon it as a slight upon me
and a slight upon my wife."

"Your wife!  I have every respect for Charlotte Elizabeth of Bavaria,
but how is she superior to one whose grandfather was the dear friend and
comrade in arms of Henry the Great?  Enough!  I will not condescend to
argue such a matter with you!  Begone, and do not return to my presence
until you have learned not to interfere in my affairs."

"For all that, my wife shall not know her!" snarled monsieur; and then,
as his brother took a fiery step or two towards him, he turned and
scuttled out of the room as fast as his awkward gait and high heels
would allow him.

But the king was to have no quiet that day.  If Madame de Maintenon's
friends had rallied to her yesterday, her enemies were active to-day.
Monsieur had hardly disappeared before there rushed into the room a
youth who bore upon his rich attire every sign of having just arrived
from a dusty journey.  He was pale-faced and auburn-haired, with
features which would have been strikingly like the king's if it were not
that his nose had been disfigured in his youth.  The king's face had
lighted up at the sight of him, but it darkened again as he hurried
forward and threw himself down at his feet.

"Oh, sire," he cried, "spare us this grief--spare us this humiliation!
I implore you to pause before you do what will bring dishonour upon
yourself and upon us!"

The king started back from him, and paced angrily up and down the room.

"This is intolerable!" he cried.  "It was bad from my brother, but worse
from my son.  You are in a conspiracy with him, Louis.  Monsieur has
told you to act this part."

The dauphin rose to his feet and looked steadfastly at his angry father.

"I have not seen my uncle," he said.  "I was at Meudon when I heard this
news--this dreadful news--and I sprang upon my horse, sire, and galloped
over to implore you to think again before you drag our royal house so
low."

"You are insolent, Louis."

"I do not mean to be so, sire.  But consider, sire, that my mother was a
queen, and that it would be strange indeed if for a step-mother I had
a--"

The king raised his hand with a gesture of authority which checked the
word upon his lips.

"Silence!" he cried, "or you may say that which would for ever set a
gulf between us.  Am I to be treated worse than my humblest subject, who
is allowed to follow his own bent in his private affairs?"

"This is not your own private affair, sire; all that you do reflects
upon your family.  The great deeds of your reign have given a new glory
to the name of Bourbon.  Oh, do not mar it now, sire! I implore it of
you upon my bended knees!"

"You talk like a fool!" cried his father roughly.  "I propose to marry a
virtuous and charming lady of one of the oldest noble families of
France, and you talk as if I were doing something degrading and unheard
of.  What is your objection to this lady?"

"That she is the daughter of a man whose vices were well known, that her
brother is of the worst repute, that she has led the life of an
adventuress, is the widow of a deformed scribbler, and that she occupies
a menial position in the palace."

The king had stamped with his foot upon the carpet more than once during
this frank address, but his anger blazed into a fury at its conclusion.

"Do you dare," he cried, with flashing eyes, "to call the charge of my
children a menial position?  I say that there is no higher in the
kingdom.  Go back to Meudon, sir, this instant, and never dare to open
your mouth again on the subject.  Away, I say!  When, in God's good
time, you are king of this country, you may claim your own way, but
until then do not venture to cross the plans of one who is both your
parent and your monarch."

The young man bowed low, and walked with dignity  from the chamber; but
he turned with his hand upon the door.

"The Abbe Fenelon came with me, sire.  Is it your pleasure to see him?"

"Away! away!" cried the king furiously, still striding up and down the
room with angry face and flashing eyes.  The dauphin left the cabinet,
and was instantly succeeded by a tall thin priest, some forty years of
age, strikingly handsome, with a pale refined face, large well-marked
features, and the easy deferential bearing of one who has had a long
training in courts.  The king turned sharply upon him, and looked hard
at him with a distrustful eye.

"Good-day, Abbe Fenelon," said he.  "May I ask what the object of this
interview is?"

"You have had the condescension, sire, on more than one occasion, to ask
my humble advice, and even to express yourself afterwards as being
pleased that you had acted upon it."

"Well?  Well?  Well?" growled the monarch.

"If rumour says truly, sire, you are now at a crisis when a word of
impartial counsel might be of value to  you.  Need I say that it
would--"

"Tut! tut!  Why all these words?" cried the king.  "You have been sent
here by others to try and influence me against Madame de Maintenon."

"Sire, I have had nothing but kindness from that lady.  I esteem and
honour her more than any lady in France."

"In that case, abbe, you will, I am sure, be glad to hear that I am
about to marry her.  Good-day, abbe.  I regret that I have not longer
time to devote to this very interesting conversation."

"But, sire--"

"When my mind is in doubt, abbe, I value your advice very highly.
On this occasion my mind is happily _not_ in doubt.  I have the honour
to wish you a very good-day."

The king's first hot anger had died away by now, and had left behind it
a cold, bitter spirit which was even more formidable to his antagonists.
The abbe, glib of tongue and fertile of resource as he was, felt himself
to be silenced and overmatched.  He walked backwards, with three long
bows, as was the custom of the court, and departed.

But the king had little breathing space.  His assailants knew that with
persistence they had bent his will before, and they trusted that they
might do so again.  It was Louvois, the minister, now who entered the
room, with his majestic port, his lofty bearing, his huge wig, and his
aristocratic face, which, however, showed some signs of trepidation as
it met the baleful eye of the king.

"Well, Louvois, what now?" he asked impatiently.  "Has some new state
matter arisen?"

"There is but one new state matter which has arisen, sire, but it is of
such importance as to banish all others from our mind."

"What then?"

"Your marriage, sire."

"You disapprove of it?"

"Oh, sire, can I help it?"

"Out of my room, sir!  Am I to be tormented to death by your
importunities?  What!  You dare to linger when I order you to go!"
The king advanced angrily upon the minister, but Louvois suddenly
flashed out his rapier.  Louis sprang back with alarm and amazement upon
his face, but it was the hilt and not the point which was presented to
him.

"Pass it through my heart, sire!" the minister cried, falling upon his
knees, his whole great frame in a quiver with emotion.  "I will not live
to see your glory fade!"

"Great heaven!" shrieked Louis, throwing the sword down upon the ground,
and raising his hands to his temples, "I believe that this is a
conspiracy to drive me mad.  Was ever a man so tormented in his life?
This will be a private marriage, man, and it will not affect the state
in the least degree.  Do you hear me?  Have you understood me? What more
do you want?"

Louvois gathered himself up, and shot his rapier back into its sheath.

"Your Majesty is determined?" he asked.

"Absolutely."

"Then I say no more.  I have done my duty."  He bowed his head as one in
deep dejection when he departed, but in truth his heart was lightened
within him, for he had the king's assurance that the woman whom he hated
would, even though his wife, not sit on the throne of the Queens of
France.

These repeated attacks, if they had not shaken the king's resolution,
had at least irritated and exasperated him to the utmost.  Such a blast
of opposition was a new thing to a man whose will had been the one law
of the land.  It left him ruffled and disturbed, and without regretting
his resolution, he still, with unreasoning petulance, felt inclined to
visit the inconvenience to which he had been put upon those whose advice
he had followed.  He wore accordingly no very cordial face when the
usher in attendance admitted the venerable figure of Father la Chaise,
his confessor.

"I wish you all happiness, sire," said the Jesuit, "and I congratulate
you from my heart that you have taken the great step which must lead to
content both in this world and the next."

"I have had neither happiness nor contentment yet, father," answered the
king peevishly.  "I have never been so pestered in my life.  The whole
court has been on its knees to me to entreat me to change my intention."

The Jesuit looked at him anxiously out of his keen gray eyes.

"Fortunately, your Majesty is a man of strong will," said he, "and not
to be so easily swayed as they think."

"No, no, I did not give an inch.  But still, it must be confessed that
it is very unpleasant to have so many against one.  I think that most
men would have been shaken."

"Now is the time to stand firm, sire; Satan rages to see you passing out
of his power, and he stirs up all his friends and sends all his
emissaries to endeavour to detain you."

But the king was not in a humour to be easily consoled.

"Upon my word, father," said he, "you do not seem to have much respect
for my family.  My brother and my son, with the Abbe Fenelon and the
Minister of War, are the emissaries to whom you allude."

"Then there is the more credit to your Majesty for having resisted them.
You have done nobly, sire.  You have earned the praise and blessing of
Holy Church."

"I trust that what I have done is right, father," said the king gravely.
"I should be glad to see you again later in the evening, but at present
I desire a little leisure for solitary thought."

Father la Chaise left the cabinet with a deep distrust of the king's
intentions.  It was obvious that the powerful appeals which had been
made to him had shaken if they had failed to alter his resolution.
What would be the result if more were made?  And more would be made;
that was as certain as that darkness follows light.  Some master-card
must be played now which would bring the matter to a crisis at once, for
every day of delay was in favour of their opponents.  To hesitate was to
lose.  All must be staked upon one final throw.

The Bishop of Meaux was waiting in the ante-room, and Father la Chaise
in a few brief words let him see the danger of the situation and the
means by which they should meet it.  Together they sought Madame de
Maintenon in her room.  She had discarded the sombre widow's dress which
she had chosen since her first coming to court, and wore now, as more in
keeping with her lofty prospects, a rich yet simple costume of white
satin with bows of silver serge.  A single diamond sparkled in the thick
coils of her dark tresses.  The change had taken years from a face and
figure which had always looked much younger than her age, and as the two
plotters looked upon her perfect complexion, her regular features, so
calm and yet so full of refinement, and the exquisite grace of her
figure and bearing, they could not but feel that if they failed in their
ends, it was not for want of having a perfect tool at their command.

She had risen at their entrance, and her expression showed that she had
read upon their faces something of the anxiety which filled their minds.

"You have evil news!" she cried.

"No, no, my daughter."  It was the bishop who spoke.  "But we must be on
our guard against our enemies, who would turn the king away from you if
they could."

Her face shone at the mention of her lover.

"Ah, you do not know!" she cried.  "He has made a vow.  I would trust
him as I would trust myself.  I know that he will be true."

But the Jesuit's intellect was arrayed against the intuition of the
woman.

"Our opponents are many and strong," said he shaking his head.
"Even if the king remain firm, he will be annoyed at every turn, so that
he will feel his life is darker instead of lighter, save, of course,
madame, for that brightness which you cannot fail to bring with you.
We must bring the matter to an end."

"And how, father?"

"The marriage must be at once!"

"At once!"

"Yes.  This very night, if possible."

"Oh, father, you ask too much.  The king would never consent to such a
proposal."

"It is he that will propose it."

"And why?"

"Because we shall force him to.  It is only thus that all the opposition
can be stopped.  When it is done, the court will accept it.  Until it is
done, they will resist it."

"What would you have me do, then, father?"

"Resign the king."

"Resign him!" She turned as pale as a lily, and looked at him in
bewilderment.

"It is the best course, madame."

"Ah, father, I might have done it last month, last week, even yesterday
morning.  But now--oh, it would break my heart!"

"Fear not, madame.  We advise you for the best.  Go to the king now, at
once.  Say to him that you have heard that he has been subjected to much
annoyance upon your account, that you cannot bear to think that you
should be a cause of dissension in his own family, and therefore you
will release him from his promise, and will withdraw yourself from the
court forever."

"Go now?  At once?"

"Yes, without loss of an instant."

She cast a light mantle about her shoulders.

"I follow your advice," she said.  "I believe that you are wiser than I.
But, oh, if he should take me at my word!"

"He will not take you at your word."

"It is a terrible risk."

"But such an end as this cannot be gained without risks.  Go, my child,
and may heaven's blessing go with you!"



CHAPTER XIII.


THE KING HAS IDEAS.

The king had remained alone in his cabinet, wrapped in somewhat gloomy
thoughts, and pondering over the means by which he might carry out his
purpose and yet smooth away the opposition which seemed to be so
strenuous and so universal.  Suddenly there came a gentle tap at the
door, and there was the woman who was in his thoughts, standing in the
twilight before him.  He sprang to his feet and held out his hands with
a smile which would have reassured her had she doubted his constancy.

"Francoise!  You here!  Then I have at last a welcome visitor, and it is
the first one to-day."

"Sire, I fear that you have been troubled."

"I have indeed, Francoise."

"But I have a remedy for it."

"And what is that?"

"I shall leave the court, sire, and you shall think no more of what has
passed between us.  I have brought discord where I meant to bring peace.
Let me retire to St. Cyr, or to the Abbey of Fontevrault, and you will
no longer be called upon to make such sacrifices for my sake."

The king turned deathly pale, and clutched at her shawl with a trembling
hand, as though he feared that she was about to put her resolution into
effect that very instant.  For years his mind had accustomed itself to
lean upon hers.  He had turned to her whenever he needed support, and
even when, as in the last week, he had broken away from her for a time,
it was still all-important to him to know that she was there, the
faithful friend, ever forgiving, ever soothing, waiting for him with her
ready counsel and sympathy.  But that she should leave him now, leave
him altogether, such a thought had never occurred to him, and it struck
him with a chill of surprised alarm.

"You cannot mean it, Francoise," he cried, in a trembling voice.
"No, no, it is impossible that you are in earnest."

"It would break my heart to leave you, sire, but it breaks it also to
think that for my sake you are estranged from your own family and
ministers."

"Tut!  Am I not the king?  Shall I not take my own course without heed
to them?  No, no, Francoise, you must not leave me!  You must stay with
me and be my wife."  He could hardly speak for agitation, and he still
grasped at her dress to detain her.  She had been precious to him
before, but was far more so now that there seemed to be a possibility of
his losing her.  She felt the strength of her position, and used it to
the utmost.

"Some time must elapse before our wedding, sire.  Yet during all that
interval you will be exposed to these annoyances.  How can I be happy
when I feel that I have brought upon you so long a period of
discomfort?"

"And why should it be so long, Francoise?"

"A day would be too long, sire, for you to be unhappy through my fault.
It is a misery to me to think of it.  Believe me, it would be better
that I should leave you."

"Never!  You shall not!  Why should we even wait a day, Francoise?  I am
ready.  You are ready.  Why should we not be married now?"

"At once!  Oh, sire!"

"We shall.   It is my wish.  It is my order.  That is my answer to those
who would drive me.  They shall know nothing of it until it is done, and
then let us see which of them will dare to treat my wife with anything
but respect.  Let it be done secretly, Francoise.  I will send in a
trusty messenger this very night for the Archbishop of Paris, and I
swear that, if all France stand in the way, he shall make us man and
wife before he departs."

"Is it your will, sire?"

"It is; and ah, I can see by your eyes that it is yours also!  We shall
not lose a moment, Francoise.  What a blessed thought of mine, which
will silence their tongues forever!  When it is ready they may know, but
not before.  To your room, then, dearest of friends and truest of women!
When we meet again, it will be to form a bond which all this court and
all this kingdom  shall not be able to loose."

The king was all on fire with the excitement of this new resolution.
He had lost his air of doubt and discontent, and he paced swiftly about
the room with a smiling face and shining eyes.  Then he touched a small
gold bell, which summoned Bontems, his private body-servant.

"What o'clock is it, Bontems?"

"It is nearly six, sire."

"Hum!" The king considered for some moments.  "Do you know where Captain
de Catinat is, Bontems?"

"He was in the grounds, sire, but I heard that he would ride back to
Paris to-night."

"Does he ride alone?"

"He has one friend with him."

"Who is this friend?  An officer of the guards?"

"No, sire; it is a stranger from over the seas, from America, as I
understand, who has stayed with him of late, and to whom Monsieur de
Catinat has been showing the wonders of your Majesty's palace."

"A stranger!  So much the better.  Go, Bontems, and bring them both to
me."

"I trust that they have not started, sire.  I will see."  He hurried
off, and was back in ten minutes in the cabinet once more.

"Well?"

"I have been fortunate, sire.  Their horses had been led out and their
feet were in the stirrups when I reached them."

"Where are they, then?"

"They await your Majesty's orders in the ante-room."

"Show them in, Bontems, and give admission to none, not even to the
minister, until they have left me."

To De Catinat an audience with the monarch was a common incident of his
duties, but it was with profound astonishment that he learned from
Bontems that his friend and companion was included in the order.  He was
eagerly endeavouring to whisper into the young American's ear some
precepts and warnings as to what to do and what to avoid, when Bontems
reappeared and ushered them into the presence.

It was with a feeling of curiosity, not unmixed with awe, that Amos
Green, to whom Governor Dongan, of New York, had been the highest
embodiment of human power, entered the private chamber of the greatest
monarch in Christendom.  The magnificence of the ante-chamber in which
he had waited, the velvets, the paintings, the gildings, with the throng
of gaily dressed officials and of magnificent guardsmen, had all
impressed his imagination, and had prepared him for some wondrous figure
robed and crowned, a fit centre for such a scene.  As his eyes fell upon
a quietly dressed, bright-eyed man, half a head shorter than himself,
with a trim dapper figure, and an erect carriage, he could not help
glancing round the room to see if this were indeed the monarch, or if it
were some other of those endless officials who interposed themselves
between him and the other world.  The reverent salute of his companion,
however, showed him that this must indeed be the king, so he bowed and
then drew himself erect with the simple dignity of a man who has been
trained in Nature's school.

"Good-evening, Captain de Catinat," said the king, with a pleasant
smile.  "Your friend, as I understand, is a stranger to this country.
I trust, sir, that you have found something here to interest and to
amuse you?"

"Yes, your Majesty.  I have seen your great city, and it is a wonderful
one.  And my friend has shown me this palace, with its woods and its
grounds.  When I go back to my own country I will have much to say of
what I have seen in your beautiful land."

"You speak French, and yet you are not a Canadian."

"No, sire; I am from the English provinces."

The king looked with interest at the powerful figure, the bold features,
and the free bearing of the young foreigner, and his mind flashed back
to the dangers which the Comte de Frontenac had foretold from these same
colonies.  If this were indeed a type of his race, they must in truth be
a people whom it would be better to have as friends than as enemies.
His mind, however, ran at present on other things than statecraft, and
he hastened to give De Catinat his orders for the night.

"You will ride into Paris on my service.  Your friend can go with you.
Two are safer than one when they bear a message of state.  I wish you,
however, to wait until nightfall before you start."

"Yes, sire."

"Let none know your errand, and see that none follow you.  You know the
house of Archbishop Harlay, prelate of Paris?"

"Yes, sire."

"You will bid him drive out hither and be at the north-west side postern
by midnight.  Let nothing hold him back.  Storm or fine, he must he here
to-night.  It is of the first importance."

"He shall have your order, sire."

"Very good.  Adieu, captain.  Adieu, monsieur.  I trust that your stay
in France may be a pleasant one."  He waved his hand, smiling with the
fascinating grace which had won so many hearts, and so dismissed the two
friends to their new mission.



CHAPTER XIV.


THE LAST CARD.

Madame de Montespan still kept to her rooms, uneasy in mind at the
king's disappearance, but unwilling to show her anxiety to the court by
appearing among them or by making any inquiry as to what had occurred.
While she thus remained in ignorance of the sudden and complete collapse
of her fortunes, she had one active and energetic agent who had lost no
incident of what had occurred, and who watched her interests with as
much zeal as if they were his own.  And indeed they were his own; for
her brother, Monsieur de Vivonne, had gained everything for which he
yearned, money, lands, and preferment, through his sister's notoriety,
and he well knew that the fall of her fortunes must be very rapidly
followed by that of his own.  By nature bold, unscrupulous, and
resourceful, he was not a man to lose the game without playing it out to
the very end with all the energy and cunning of which he was capable.
Keenly alert to all that passed, he had, from the time that he first
heard the rumour of the king's intention, haunted the antechamber and
drawn his own conclusions from what he had seen.  Nothing had escaped
him--the disconsolate faces of monsieur and of the dauphin, the visit of
Pere la Chaise and Bossuet to the lady's room, her return, the triumph
which shone in her eyes as she came away from the interview.  He had
seen Bontems hurry off and summon the guardsman and his friend.  He had
heard them order their horses to be brought out in a couple of hours'
time, and finally, from a spy whom he employed among the servants, he
learned that an unwonted bustle was going forward in Madame de
Maintenon's room, that Mademoiselle Nanon was half wild with excitement,
and that two court milliners had been hastily summoned to madame's
apartment.  It was only, however, when he heard from the same servant
that a chamber was to be prepared for the reception that night of the
Archbishop of Paris that he understood how urgent was the danger.

Madame de Montespan had spent the evening stretched upon a sofa, in the
worst possible humour with everyone around her.  She had read, but had
tossed aside the book.  She had written, but had torn up the paper.
A thousand fears and suspicions chased each other through her head.
What had become of the king, then?  He had seemed cold yesterday, and
his eyes had been for ever sliding round to the clock.  And to-day he
had not come at all.  Was it his gout, perhaps?  Or was it possible that
she was again losing her hold upon him?  Surely it could not be that!
She turned upon her couch and faced the mirror which flanked the door.
The candles had just been lit in her chamber, two score of them, each
with silver backs which reflected their light until the room was as
bright as day.  There in the mirror was the brilliant chamber, the deep
red ottoman, and the single figure in its gauzy dress of white and
silver.  She leaned upon her elbow, admiring the deep tint of her own
eyes with their long dark lashes, the white curve of her throat, and the
perfect oval of her face.  She examined it all carefully, keenly, as
though it were her rival that lay before her, but nowhere could she see
a scratch of Time's malicious nails.  She still had her beauty, then.
And if it had once won the king, why should it not suffice to hold him?
Of course it would do so.  She reproached herself for her fears.
Doubtless he was indisposed, or perhaps he would come still.  Ha! there
was the sound of an opening door and of a quick step in her ante-room.
Was it he, or at least his messenger with a note from  him?

But no, it was her brother, with the haggard eyes and drawn face of a
man who is weighed down with  his own evil tidings.  He turned as he
entered, fastened the door, and then striding across the room, locked
the other one which led to her boudoir.

"We are safe from interruption," he panted.  "I have hastened here, for
every second may be invaluable.  Have you heard anything from the king?"

"Nothing."  She had sprung to her feet, and was gazing at him with a
face which was as pale as his own.

"The hour has come for action, Francoise.  It is the hour at which the
Mortemarts have always shown at their best.  Do not yield to the blow,
then, but gather yourself to meet it."

"What is it?"  She tried to speak in her natural tone, but only a
whisper came to her dry lips.

"The king is about to marry Madame de Maintenon."

"The _gouvernante_!  The widow Scarron!  It is impossible!"

"It is certain."

"To marry?  Did you say to marry?"

"Yes, he will marry her."

The woman flung out her hands in a gesture of contempt, and laughed loud
and bitterly.

"You are easily frightened, brother," said she.  "Ah, you do not know
your little sister.  Perchance if you were not my brother you might rate
my powers more highly.  Give me a day, only one little day, and you will
see Louis, the proud Louis, down at the hem of my dress to ask my pardon
for this slight.  I tell you that he cannot break the bonds that hold
him.  One day is all I ask to bring him back."

"But you cannot have it."

"What?"

"The marriage is to-night."

"You are mad, Charles."

"I am certain of it."  In a few broken sentences he shot out all that he
had seen and heard.  She listened with a grim face, and hands which
closed ever tighter and tighter as he proceeded.  But he had said the
truth about the Mortemarts.  They came of a contentious blood, and were
ever at their best at a moment of action.  Hate rather than dismay
filled her heart as she listened, and the whole energy of her nature
gathered and quickened to meet the crisis.

"I shall go and see him," she cried, sweeping towards the door.

"No, no, Francoise.  Believe me, you will ruin everything if you do.
Strict orders have been given to the guard to admit no one to the king."

"But I shall insist upon passing them."

"Believe me, sister, it is worse than useless.  I have spoken with the
officer of the guard, and the command is a stringent one."

"Ah, I shall manage."

"No, you shall not."  He put his back against the door.  "I know that it
is useless, and I will not have my sister make herself the
laughing-stock of the court, trying to force her way into the room of a
man who repulses her."

His sister's cheeks flushed at the words, and she paused irresolute.

"Had I only a day, Charles, I am sure that I could bring him back to me.
There has been some other influence here, that meddlesome Jesuit or the
pompous Bossuet, perhaps.  Only one day to counteract their wiles!
Can I not see them waving hell-fire before his foolish eyes, as one
swings a torch before a bull to turn it?  Oh, if I could but baulk them
to-night!  That woman! that cursed woman!  The foul viper which I nursed
in my bosom!  Oh, I had rather see Louis in his grave than married to
her!  Charles, Charles, it must be stopped; I say it must be stopped!
I will give anything, everything, to prevent it!"

"What will you give, my sister?"

She looked at him aghast.  "What! you do not wish me to buy you?" she
said.

"No; but I wish to buy others."

"Ha!  You see a chance, then?"

"One, and one only.  But time presses.  I want money."

"How much?"

"I cannot have too much.  All that you can spare."

With hands which trembled with eagerness she unlocked a secret cupboard
in the wall in which she concealed her valuables.  A blaze of jewellery
met her brother's eyes as he peered over her shoulder.  Great rubies,
costly emeralds, deep ruddy beryls, glimmering diamonds, were scattered
there in one brilliant shimmering many-coloured heap, the harvest which
she had reaped from the king's generosity during more than fifteen
years.  At one side were three drawers, the one over the other.
She drew out the lowest one.  It was full to the brim of glittering
_louis d'ors_.

"Take what you will!" she said.  "And now your plan! Quick!"

He stuffed the money in handfuls into the side pockets of his coat.
Coins slipped between his fingers and tinkled and wheeled over the
floor, but neither cast a glance at them.

"Your plan?" she repeated.

"We must prevent the Archbishop from arriving here.  Then the marriage
would be postponed until to-morrow night, and you would have time to
act."

"But how prevent it?"

"There are a dozen good rapiers about the court which are to be bought
for less than I carry in one pocket.  There is De la Touche, young
Turberville, old Major Despard, Raymond de Carnac, and the four Latours.
I will gather them together, and wait on the road."

"And waylay the archbishop?"

"No; the messengers."

"Oh, excellent!  You are a prince of brothers!  If no message reaches
Paris, we are saved.  Go; go; do not lose a moment, my dear Charles."

"It is very well, Francoise; but what are we to do with them when we get
them?  We may lose our heads over the matter, it seems to me.  After
all, they are the king's messengers, and we can scarce pass our swords
through them."

"No?"

"There would be no forgiveness for that."

"But consider that before the matter is looked into I shall have
regained my influence with the king."

"All very fine, my little sister, but how long is your influence to
last?  A pleasant life for us if at every change of favour we have to
fly the country!  No, no, Francoise; the most that we can do is to
detain the messengers."

"Where can you detain them?"

"I have an idea.  There is the castle of the Marquis de Montespan at
Portillac."

"Of my husband!"

"Precisely."

"Of my most bitter enemy!  Oh, Charles, you are not serious."

"On the contrary, I was never more so.  The marquis was away in Paris
yesterday, and has not yet returned.  Where is the ring with his arms?"

She hunted among her jewels and picked out a gold ring with a broad
engraved face.

"This will be our key.  When good Marceau, the steward, sees it, every
dungeon in the castle will be at our disposal.  It is that or nothing.
There is no other place where we can hold them safe."

"But when my husband returns?"

"Ah, he may be a little puzzled as to his captives.  And the complaisant
Marceau may have an evil quarter of an hour.  But that may not be for a
week, and by that time, my little sister, I have confidence enough in
you to think that you really may have finished the campaign.  Not
another word, for every moment is of value.  Adieu, Francoise!  We shall
not be conquered without a struggle.  I will send a message to you
to-night to let you know how fortune uses us."  He took her fondly in
his arms, kissed her, and then hurried from the room.

For hours after his departure she paced up and down with noiseless steps
upon the deep soft carpet, her hand still clenched, her eyes flaming,
her whole soul wrapped and consumed with jealousy and hatred of her
rival.  Ten struck, and eleven, and midnight, but still she waited,
fierce and eager, straining her ears for every foot-fall which might be
the herald of news.  At last it came.  She heard the quick step in the
passage, the tap at the ante-room door, and the whispering of her black
page.  Quivering with impatience, she rushed in and took the note
herself from the dusty cavalier who had brought it.  It was but six
words scrawled roughly upon a wisp of dirty paper, but it brought the
colour back to her cheeks and the smile to her lips.  It was her
brother's writing, and it ran:  "The archbishop will not come to-night."



CHAPTER XV.


THE MIDNIGHT MISSION.

De Catinat in the meanwhile was perfectly aware of the importance of the
mission which had been assigned to him.  The secrecy which had been
enjoined by the king, his evident excitement, and the nature of his
orders, all confirmed the rumours which were already beginning to buzz
round the court.  He knew enough of the intrigues and antagonisms with
which the court was full to understand that every precaution was
necessary in carrying out his instructions.  He waited, therefore, until
night had fallen before ordering his soldier-servant to bring round the
two horses to one of the less public gates of the grounds.  As he and
his friend walked together to the spot, he gave the young American a
rapid sketch of the situation at the court, and of the chance that this
nocturnal ride might be an event which would affect the future history
of France.

"I like your king," said Amos Green, "and I am glad to ride in his
service.  He is a slip of a man to be the head of a great nation, but he
has the eye of a chief.  If one met him alone in a Maine forest, one
would know him as a man who was different to his fellows.  Well, I am
glad that he is going to marry again, though it's a great house for any
woman to have to look after."

De Catinat smiled at his comrade's idea of a queen's duties.

"Are you armed?" he asked.  "You have no sword or pistols?"

"No; if I may not carry my gun, I had rather not be troubled by tools
that I have never learned to use.  I have my knife.  But why do you
ask?"

"Because there may be danger."

"And how?"

"Many have an interest in stopping this marriage.  All the first men of
the kingdom are bitterly against it.  If they could stop _us_, they
would stop _it_, for to-night at least."

"But I thought it was a secret?"

"There is no such thing at a court.  There is the dauphin, or the king's
brother, either of them, or any of their friends, would be right glad
that we should be in the Seine before we reach the archbishop's house
this night.  But who is this?"

A burly figure had loomed up through the gloom on the path upon which
they were going.  As it approached, a coloured lamp dangling from one of
the trees shone upon the blue and silver of an officer of the guards.
It was Major de Brissac, of De Catinat's own regiment.

"Hullo!  Whither away?" he asked.

"To Paris, major."

"I go there myself within an hour.  Will you not wait, that we may go
together?"

"I am sorry, but I ride on a matter of urgency.  I must not lose a
minute."

"Very good.  Good-night, and a pleasant ride."

"Is he a trusty man, our friend the major?" asked Amos Green, glancing
back.

"True as steel."

"Then I would have a word with him."  The American hurried back along
the way they had come, while De Catinat stood chafing at this
unnecessary delay.  It was a full five minutes before his companion
joined him, and the fiery blood of the French soldier was hot with
impatience and anger.

"I think that perhaps you had best ride into Paris at your leisure, my
friend," said he.  "If I go upon the king's service I cannot be delayed
whenever the whim takes you."

"I am sorry," answered the other quietly.  "I had something to say to
your major, and I thought that maybe I might not see him again."

"Well, here are the horses," said the guardsman as he pushed open the
postern-gate.  "Have you fed an watered them, Jacques?"

"Yes, my captain," answered the man who stood at their head.

"Boot and saddle, then, friend Green, and we shall not draw rein again
until we see the lights of Paris in front of us."

The soldier-groom peered through the darkness after them with a sardonic
smile upon his face.  "You won't draw rein, won't you?" he muttered as
he turned away.  "Well, we shall see about that, my captain;  we shall
see about that."

For a mile or more the comrades galloped along, neck to neck and knee to
knee.  A wind had sprung up from the westward, and the heavens were
covered with heavy gray clouds, which drifted swiftly across, a crescent
moon peeping fitfully from time to time between the rifts.  Even during
these moments of brightness the road, shadowed as it was by heavy trees,
was very dark, but when the light was shut off it was hard, but for the
loom upon either side, to tell where it lay.  De Catinat at least found
it so, and he peered anxiously over his horse's ears, and stooped his
face to the mane in his efforts to see his way.

"What do you make of the road?" he asked at last.

"It looks as if a good many carriage wheels had passed over it to-day."

"What! _Mon Dieu!_ Do you mean to say that you can see carriage wheels
there?"

"Certainly.  Why not?"

"Why, man, I cannot see the road at all."

Amos Green laughed heartily.  "When you have travelled in the woods by
night as often as I have," said he, "when to show a light may mean to
lose your hair, one comes to learn to use one's eyes."

"Then you had best ride on, and I shall keep just behind you.
So! _Hola!_  What is the matter now?"

There had been the sudden sharp snap of something breaking, and the
American had reeled for an instant in the saddle.

"It's one of my stirrup leathers.  It has fallen."

"Can you find it?"

"Yes; but I can ride as well without it.  Let us push on."

"Very good.  I can just see you now."

They had galloped for about five minutes in this fashion, De Catinat's
horse's head within a few feet of the other's tail, when there was a
second snap, and the guardsman rolled out of the saddle on to the
ground.  He kept his grip of the reins, however, and was up in an
instant at his horse's head, sputtering out oaths as only an angry
Frenchman can.

"A thousand thunders of heaven!" he cried.  "What was it that happened
then?"

"Your leather has gone too."

"Two stirrup leathers in five minutes?  It is not possible."

"It is not possible that it should be chance," said the American
gravely, swinging himself off his horse.  "Why, what is this?  My other
leather is cut, and hangs only by a thread."

"And so does mine.  I can feel it when I pass my hand along.  Have you a
tinder-box?  Let us strike a light."

"No, no; the man who is in the dark is in safety.  I let the other folk
strike lights.  We can see all that is needful to us."

"My rein is cut also."

"And so is mine."

"And the girth of my saddle."

"It is a wonder that we came so far with whole bones.  Now, who has
played us this little trick?"

"Who could it be but that rogue Jacques!  He has had the horses in his
charge.  By my faith, he shall know what the strappado means when I see
Versailles again."

"But why should he do it?"

"Ah, he has been set on to it.  He has been a tool in the hands of those
who wished to hinder our journey."

"Very like.  But they must have had some reason behind.  They knew well
that to cut our straps would not prevent us from reaching Paris, since
we could ride bareback, or, for that matter, could run it if need be."

"They hoped to break our necks."

"One neck they might break, but scarce those of two, since the fate of
the one would warn the other."

"Well, then, what do you think that they meant?" cried De Catinat
impatiently.  "For heaven's sake, let us come to some conclusion, for
every minute is of importance."

But the other was not to be hurried out of his cool, methodical fashion
of speech and of thought.

"They could not have thought to stop us," said he.

"What did they mean, then?  They could only have meant to delay us.
And why should they wish to delay us?  What could it matter to them if
we gave our message an hour or two sooner or an hour or two later?
It could not matter."

"For heaven's sake--" broke in De Catinat impetuously.

But Amos Green went on hammering the matter slowly out.

"Why should they wish to delay us, then?  There's only one reason that I
can see.  In order to give other folk time to get in front of us and
stop us.  That is it, captain.  I'd lay you a beaver-skin to a
rabbit-pelt that I'm on the track.  There's been a party of a dozen
horsemen along this ground since the dew began to fall.  If they were
delayed, they would have time to form their plans before we came."

"By my faith, you may be right," said De Catinat thoughtfully.  "What
would you propose?"

"That we ride back, and go by some less direct way."

"It is impossible.  We should have to ride back to Meudon cross-roads,
and then it would add ten miles to our journey."

"It is better to get there an hour later than not to get there at all."

"Pshaw! we are surely not to be turned from our path by a mere guess.
There is the St. Germain cross-road about a mile below.  When we reach
it we can strike to the right along the south side of the river, and so
change our course."

"But we may not reach it."

"If anyone bars our way we shall know how to treat with them."

"You would fight, then?"

"Yes."

"What! with a dozen of them?"

"A hundred, if we are on the king's errand."

Amos Green shrugged his shoulders.

"You are surely not afraid?"

"Yes, I am, mighty afraid.  Fighting's good enough when there's no help
for it.  But I call it a fool's plan to ride straight into a trap when
you might go round it."

"You may do what you like," said De Catinat angrily.

"My father was a gentleman, the owner of a thousand arpents of land, and
his son is not going to flinch in the king's service."

"My father," answered Amos Green, "was a merchant, the owner of a
thousand skunk-skins, and his son knows a fool when he sees one."

"You are insolent, sir," cried the guardsman.  "We can settle this
matter at some more fitting opportunity.  At present I continue my
mission, and you are very welcome to turn back to Versailles if you are
so inclined."  He raised his hat with punctilious politeness, sprang on
to his horse, and rode on down the road.

Amos Green hesitated a little, and then mounting, he soon overtook his
companion.  The latter, however, was still in no very sweet temper, and
rode with a rigid neck, without a glance or a word for his comrade.
Suddenly his eyes caught something in the gloom which brought a smile
back to his face.  Away in front of them, between two dark tree clumps,
lay a vast number of shimmering, glittering yellow points, as thick as
flowers in a garden.  They were the lights of Paris.

"See!" he cried, pointing.  "There is the city, and close here must be
the St. Germain road.  We shall take it, so as to avoid any danger."

"Very good!  But you should not ride too fast, when your girth may break
at any moment."

"Nay, come on; we are close to our journey's end.  The St. Germain road
opens just round this corner, and then we shall see our way, for the
lights will guide us."

He cut his horse with his whip, and they galloped together round the
curve.  Next instant they were both down in one wild heap of tossing
heads and struggling hoofs, De Catinat partly covered by his horse, and
his comrade hurled twenty paces, where he lay silent and motionless in
the centre of the road.



CHAPTER XVI.


"WHEN THE DEVIL DRIVES."

Monsieur de Vivonne had laid his ambuscade with discretion.  With a
closed carriage and a band of chosen ruffians he had left the palace a
good half-hour before the king's messengers, and by the aid of his
sister's gold he had managed that their journey should not be a very
rapid one.  On reaching the branch road he had ordered the coachman to
drive some little distance along it, and had tethered all the horses to
a fence under his charge.  He had then stationed one of the band as a
sentinel some distance up the main highway to flash a light when the two
courtiers were approaching.  A stout cord had been fastened eighteen
inches from the ground to the trunk of a wayside sapling, and on
receiving the signal the other end was tied to a gate-post upon the
further side.  The two cavaliers could not possibly see it, coming as it
did at the very curve of the road, and as a consequence their horses
fell heavily to the ground, and brought them down with them.  In an
instant the dozen ruffians who had lurked in the shadow of the trees
sprang out upon them, sword in hand; but there was no movement from
either of their victims.  De Catinat lay breathing heavily, one leg
under his horse's neck, and the blood trickling in a thin stream down
his pale face, and falling, drop by drop, on to his silver
shoulder-straps.  Amos Green was unwounded, but his injured girth had
given way in the fall, and he had been hurled from his horse on to the
hard road with a violence which had driven every particle of breath from
his body.

Monsieur de Vivonne lit a lantern, and flashed it upon the faces of the
two unconscious men.  "This is a bad business, Major Despard," said he
to the man next him.  "I believe that they are both gone."

"Tut! tut!  By my soul, men did not die like that when I was young!"
answered the other, leaning forward his fierce grizzled face into the
light of the lantern.  "I've been cast from my horse as often as there
are tags to my doublet, but, save for the snap of a bone or two, I never
had any harm from it.  Pass your rapier under the third rib of the
horses, De la Touche; they will never be fit to set hoof to ground
again."  Two sobbing gasps and the thud of their straining necks falling
back to earth told that the two steeds had come to the end of their
troubles.

"Where is Latour?" asked Monsieur de Vivonne.  "Achille Latour has
studied medicine at Montpellier.  Where is he?"

"Here I am, your excellency.  It is not for me to boast, but I am as
handy a man with a lancet as with a rapier, and it was an evil day for
some sick folk when I first took to buff and bandolier.  Which would you
have me look to?"

"This one in the road."

The trooper bent over Amos Green.  "He is not long for this world," said
he.  "I can tell it by the catch of his breath."

"And what is his injury?"

"A subluxation of the epigastrium.  Ah, the words of learning will still
come to my tongue, but it is hard to put into common terms.  Methinks
that it were well for me to pass my dagger through his throat, for his
end is very near."

"Not for your life!" cried the leader.  "If he die without wound, they
cannot lay it to our charge.  Turn now to the other."

The man bent over De Catinat, and placed his hand upon his heart.  As he
did so the soldier heaved a long sigh, opened his eyes, and gazed about
him with the face of one who knows neither where he is nor how he came
there.  De Vivonne, who had drawn his hat down over his eyes, and
muffled the lower part of his face in his mantle, took out his flask,
and poured a little of the contents down the injured man's throat.
In an instant a dash of colour had come back into the guardsman's
bloodless cheeks, and the light of memory into his eyes.  He struggled
up on to his feet, and strove furiously to push away those who held him.
But his head still swam, and he could scarce hold himself erect.

"I must to Paris!" he gasped; "I must to Paris!  It is the king's
mission.  You stop me at your peril!"

"He has no hurt save a scratch," said the ex-doctor.

"Then hold him fast.  And first carry the dying man to the carriage."

The lantern threw but a small ring of yellow light, so that when it had
been carried over to De Catinat, Amos Green was left lying in the
shadow.  Now they brought the light back to where the young man lay.
But there was no sign of him.  He was gone.

For a moment the little group of ruffians stood staring, the light of
their lantern streaming up upon their plumed hats, their fierce eyes,
and savage faces.  Then a burst of oaths broke from them, and De Vivonne
caught the false doctor by the throat, and hurling him down, would have
choked him upon the spot, had the others not dragged them apart.

"You lying dog!" he cried.  "Is this your skill?  The man has fled, and
we are ruined!"

"He has done it in his death-struggle," gasped the other hoarsely,
sitting up and rubbing his throat.  "I tell you that he was
_in extremis_.  He cannot be far off."

"That is true.  He cannot be far off," cried De Vivonne.  "He has
neither horse nor arms.  You, Despard and Raymond de Carnac, guard the
other, that he play us no trick.  Do you, Latour, and you, Turberville,
ride down the road, and wait by the south gate.  If he enter Paris at
all, he must come in that way.  If you get him, tie him before you on
your horse, and bring him to the rendezvous.  In any case, it matters
little, for he is a stranger, this fellow, and only here by chance.  Now
lead the other to the carriage, and we shall get away before an alarm is
given."

The two horsemen rode off in pursuit of the fugitive, and De Catinat,
still struggling desperately to escape, was dragged down the St. Germain
road and thrust into the carriage, which had waited at some distance
while these incidents were being enacted.  Three of the horsemen rode
ahead, the coachman was curtly ordered to follow them, and De Vivonne,
having despatched one of the band with a note to his sister, followed
after the coach with the remainder of his desperadoes.

The unfortunate guardsman had now entirely recovered his senses, and
found himself with a strap round his ankles, and another round his
wrists, a captive inside a moving prison which lumbered heavily along
the country road.  He had been stunned by the shock of his fall, and his
leg was badly bruised by the weight of his horse; but the cut on his
forehead was a mere trifle, and the bleeding had already ceased.
His mind, however, pained him more than his body.  He sank his head into
his pinioned hands, and stamped madly with his feet, rocking himself to
and fro in his despair.  What a fool, a treble fool, he had been!
He, an old soldier, who had seen something of war, to walk with open
eyes into such a trap!  The king had chosen him of all men, as a trusty
messenger, and yet he had failed him--and failed him so ignominiously,
without shot fired or sword drawn.  He was warned, too, warned by a
young man who knew nothing of court intrigue, and who was guided only by
the wits which Nature had given him.  De Catinat dashed himself down
upon the leather cushion in the agony of his thoughts.

But then came a return of that common-sense which lies so very closely
beneath the impetuosity of the Celt.  The matter was done now, and he
must see if it could not be mended.  Amos Green had escaped.  That was
one grand point in his favour.  And Amos Green had heard the king's
message, and realised its importance.  It was true that he knew nothing
of Paris, but surely a man who could pick his way at night through the
forests of Maine would not be baulked in finding so well-known a house
as that of the Archbishop of Paris.  But then there came a sudden
thought which turned De Catinat's heart to lead.  The city gates were
locked at eight o'clock in the evening.  It was now nearly nine.  It
would have been easy for him, whose uniform was a voucher for his
message, to gain his way through.  But how could Amos Green, a foreigner
and a civilian, hope to pass?  It was impossible, clearly impossible.
And yet, somehow, in spite of the impossibility, he still clung to a
vague hope that a man so full of energy and resource might find some way
out of the difficulty.

And then the thought of escape occurred to his mind.  Might he not even
now be in time, perhaps, to carry his own message?  Who were these men
who had seized him?  They had said nothing to give him a hint as to
whose tools they were.  Monsieur and the dauphin occurred to his mind.
Probably one or the other.  He had only recognised one of them, old
Major Despard, a man who frequented the low wine-shops of Versailles,
and whose sword was ever at the disposal of the longest purse.
And where were these people taking him to?  It might be to his death.
But if they wished to do away with him, why should they have brought him
back to consciousness? and why this carriage and drive?  Full of
curiosity, he peered out of the windows.

A horseman was riding close up on either side; but there was glass in
front of the carriage, and through this he could gain some idea as to
his whereabouts.  The clouds had cleared now, and the moon was shining
brightly, bathing the whole wide landscape in its shimmering light.
To the right lay the open country, broad plains with clumps of woodland,
and the towers of castles pricking out from above the groves.  A heavy
bell was ringing in some monastery, and its dull booming came and went
with the breeze.  On the left, but far away, lay the glimmer of Paris.
They were leaving it rapidly behind.  Whatever his destination, it was
neither the capital nor Versailles.  Then he began to count the chances
of escape. His sword had been removed, and his pistols were still in the
holsters beside his unfortunate horse.  He was unarmed, then, even if he
could free himself, and his captors were at least a dozen in number.
There were three on ahead, riding abreast along the white, moonlit road.
Then there was one on each side, and he should judge by the clatter of
hoofs that there could not be fewer than half a dozen behind. That would
make exactly twelve, including the coachman, too many, surely, for an
unarmed man to hope to baffle.  At the thought of the coachman he had
glanced through the glass front at the broad back of the man, and he had
suddenly, in the glimmer of the carriage lamp, observed something which
struck him with horror.

The man was evidently desperately wounded.  It was strange indeed that
he could still sit there and flick his whip with so terrible an injury.
In the back of his great red coat, just under the left shoulder-blade,
was a gash in the cloth, where some weapon had passed, and all round was
a wide patch of dark scarlet which told its own tale.  Nor was this all.
As he raised his whip, the moonlight shone upon his hand, and De Catinat
saw with a shudder that it also was splashed and clogged with blood.
The guardsman craned his neck to catch a glimpse of the man's face; but
his broad-brimmed hat was drawn low, and the high collar of his
driving-coat was raised, so that his features were in the shadow.
This silent man in front of him, with the horrible marks upon his
person, sent a chill to De Catinat's valiant heart, and he muttered over
one of Marot's Huguenot psalms; for who but the foul fiend himself would
drive a coach with those crimsoned hands and with a sword driven through
his body?

And now they had come to a spot where the main road ran onwards, but a
smaller side track wound away down the steep slope of a hill, and so in
the direction of the Seine.  The advance-guard had kept to the main
road, and the two horsemen on either side were trotting in the same
direction, when, to De Catinat's amazement, the carriage suddenly
swerved to one side, and in an instant plunged down the steep incline,
the two stout horses galloping at their topmost speed, the coachman
standing up and lashing furiously at them, and the clumsy old vehicle
bounding along in a way which threw him backwards and forwards from one
seat to the other.  Behind him he could hear a shout of consternation
from the escort, and then the rush of galloping hoofs.  Away they flew,
the roadside poplars dancing past at either window, the horses
thundering along with their stomachs to the earth, and that demon driver
still waving those horrible red hands in the moonlight and screaming out
to the maddened steeds.  Sometimes the carriage jolted one way,
sometimes another, swaying furiously, and running on two side wheels as
though it must every instant go over.  And yet, fast as they went, their
pursuers went faster still.  The rattle of their hoofs was at their very
backs, and suddenly at one of the windows there came into view the red,
distended nostrils of a horse.  Slowly it drew forward, the muzzle, the
eye, the ears, the mane, coming into sight as the rider still gained
upon them, and then above them the fierce face of Despard and the gleam
of a brass pistol barrel.

"At the horse, Despard, at the horse!" cried an authoritative voice from
behind.

The pistol flashed, and the coach lurched over as one of the horses gave
a convulsive spring.  But the driver still shrieked and lashed with his
whip, while the carriage bounded onwards.

But now the road turned a sudden curve, and there, right in front of
them, not a hundred paces away, was the Seine, running cold and still in
the moonshine.  The bank on either side of the highway ran straight down
without any break to the water's edge.  There was no sign of a bridge,
and a black shadow in the centre of the stream showed where the
ferry-boat was returning after conveying some belated travellers across.
The driver never hesitated, but gathering up the reins, he urged the
frightened creatures into the river.  They hesitated, however, when they
first felt the cold water about their hocks, and even as they did so one
of them, with a low moan, fell over upon her side.  Despard's bullet had
found its mark.  Like a flash the coachman hurled himself from the box
and plunged into the stream;  but the pursuing horsemen were all round
him before this, and half-a-dozen hands had seized him ere he could
reach deep water, and had dragged him to the bank.  His broad hat had
been struck off in the struggle, and De Catinat saw his face in the
moonshine.  Great heavens! It was Amos Green.



CHAPTER XVII.


THE DUNGEON OF PORTILLAC.

The desperadoes were as much astonished as was De Catinat when they
found that they had recaptured in this extraordinary manner the
messenger whom they had given up for lost.  A volley of oaths and
exclamations broke from them, as, on tearing off the huge red coat of
the coachman, they disclosed the sombre dress of the young American.

"A thousand thunders!" cried one.  "And this is the man whom that
devil's brat Latour would make out to be dead!"

"And how came he here?"

"And where is Etienne Arnaud?"

"He has stabbed Etienne.  See the great cut in the coat!"

"Ay; and see the colour of his hand!  He has stabbed him, and taken his
coat and hat."

"What! while we were all within stone's cast!"

"Ay; there is no other way out of it."

"By my soul!" cried old Despard, "I had never much love for old Etienne,
but I have emptied a cup of wine with him before now, and I shall see
that he has justice.  Let us cast these reins round the fellow's neck
and hang him upon this tree."

Several pairs of hands were already unbuckling the harness of the dead
horse, when De Vivonne pushed his way into the little group, and with a
few curt words checked their intended violence.

"It is as much as your lives are worth to touch him," said he.

"But he has slain Etienne Arnaud."

"That score may be settled afterwards.  To-night he is the king's
messenger.  Is the other all safe?"

"Yes, he is here."

"Tie this man, and put him in beside him.  Unbuckle the traces of the
dead horse.  So!  Now, De Carnac, put your own into the harness.
You can mount the box and drive, for we have not very far to go."

The changes were rapidly made; Amos Green was thrust in beside De
Catinat, and the carriage was soon toiling up the steep incline which it
had come down so precipitately.  The American had said not a word since
his capture, and had remained absolutely stolid, with his hands crossed
over his chest whilst his fate was under discussion.  Now that he was
alone once more with his comrade, however, he frowned and muttered like
a man who feels that fortune has used him badly.

"Those infernal horses!" he grumbled.  "Why, an American horse would
have taken to the water like a duck.  Many a time have I swum my old
stallion Sagamore across the Hudson.  Once over the river, we should
have had a clear lead to Paris."

"My dear friend," cried De Catinat, laying his manacled hands upon those
of his comrade, "can you forgive me for speaking as I did upon the way
from Versailles?"

"Tut, man! I never gave it a thought."

"You were right a thousand times, and I was, as you said, a fool--a
blind, obstinate fool.  How nobly you have stood by me!  But how came
you there?  Never in my life have I been so astonished as when I saw
your face."

Amos Green chuckled to himself.  "I thought that maybe it would be a
surprise to you if you knew who was driving you," said he.  "When I was
thrown from my horse I lay quiet, partly because I wanted to get a grip
of my breath, and partly because it seemed to me to be more healthy to
lie than to stand with all those swords clinking in my ears.  Then they
all got round  you, and I rolled into the ditch, crept along it, got on
the cross-road in the shadow of the trees, and was beside the carriage
before ever they knew that I was gone.  I saw in a flash that there was
only one way by which I could be of use to you.  The coachman was
leaning round with his head turned to see what was going on behind him.
I out with my knife, sprang up on the front wheel, and stopped his
tongue forever."

"What! without a sound!"

"I have not lived among the Indians for nothing."

"And then?"

"I pulled him down into the ditch, and I got into his coat and his hat.
I did not scalp him."

"Scalp him?  Great heavens!  Such things are only done among savages."

"Ah! I thought that maybe it was not the custom  of the country.  I am
glad now that I did not do it.  I had hardly got the reins before they
were all back and bundled you into the coach.  I was not afraid of their
seeing me, but I was scared lest I should not know which road to take,
and so set them on the trail.  But they made it easy to me by sending
some of their riders in front, so I did well until I saw that by-track
and made a run for it.  We'd have got away, too, if that rogue hadn't
shot the horse, and if the beasts had faced the water."

The guardsman again pressed his comrade's hands.  "You have been as true
to me as hilt to blade," said he.  "It was a bold thought and a bold
deed."

"And what now?" asked the American.

"I do not know who these men are, and I do not know whither they are
taking us."

"To their villages, likely, to burn us."

De Catinat laughed in spite of his anxiety.  "You will have it that we
are back in America again," said he.  "They don't do things in that way
in France."

"They seem free enough with hanging in France.  I tell you, I felt like
a smoked-out 'coon when that trace was round my neck."

"I fancy that they are taking us to some place where they can shut us up
until this business blows over."

"Well, they'll need to be smart about it."

"Why?"

"Else maybe they won't find us when they want us."

"What do you mean?"

For answer, the American, with a twist and a wriggle, drew his two hands
apart, and held them in front of his comrade's face.

"Bless you, it is the first thing they teach the papooses in an Indian
wigwam.  I've got out of a Huron's thongs of raw hide before now, and it
ain't very likely that a stiff stirrup leather will hold me.  Put your
hands out."  With a few dexterous twists he loosened De Catinat's bonds,
until he also was able to slip his hands free.  "Now for your feet, if
you'll put them up.  They'll find that we are easier to catch than to
hold."

But at that moment the carriage began to slow down, and the clank of the
hoofs of the riders in front of them died suddenly away.  Peeping
through the windows, the prisoners saw a huge dark building stretching
in front of them, so high and so broad that the night shrouded it in
upon every side.  A great archway hung above them, and the lamps shone
on the rude wooden gate, studded with ponderous clamps and nails.  In
the upper part of the door was a small square iron grating, and through
this they could catch a glimpse of the gleam of a lantern and of a
bearded face which looked out at them.  De Vivonne, standing in his
stirrups, craned his neck up towards the grating, so that the two men
most interested could hear little of the conversation which followed.
They saw only that the horseman held a gold ring up in the air, and that
the face above, which had begun by shaking and frowning, was now nodding
and smiling.  An instant later the head disappeared, the door swung open
upon screaming hinges, and the carriage drove on into the courtyard
beyond, leaving the escort, with the exception of De Vivonne, outside.
As the horses pulled up, a knot of rough fellows clustered round, and
the two prisoners were dragged roughly out.  In the light of the torches
which flared around them they could see that they were hemmed in by high
turreted walls upon every side.  A bulky man with a bearded face, the
same whom they had seen at the grating, was standing in the centre of
the group of armed men issuing his orders.

"To the upper dungeon, Simon!" he cried.  "And see that they have two
bundles of straw and a loaf of bread until we learn our master's will."

"I know not who your master may be," said De Catinat, "but I would ask
you by what warrant he dares to stop two messengers of the king while
travelling in his service?"

"By St. Denis, if my master play the king a trick, it will be but tie
and tie," the stout man answered, with a grin.  "But no more talk!
Away with them, Simon, and you answer to me for their safe-keeping."

It was in vain that De Catinat raved and threatened, invoking the most
terrible menaces upon all who were concerned in detaining him.  Two
stout knaves thrusting him from behind and one dragging in front forced
him through a narrow gate and along a stone-flagged passage, a small man
in black buckram with a bunch of keys in one hand and a swinging lantern
in the other leading the way.  Their ankles had been so tied that they
could but take steps of a foot in length.  Shuffling along, they made
their way down three successive corridors and through three doors, each
of which was locked and barred behind them.  Then they ascended a
winding stone stair, hollowed out in the centre by the feet of
generations of prisoners and of jailers, and finally they were thrust
into a small square dungeon, and two trusses of straw were thrown in
after them.  An instant later a heavy key turned in the lock, and they
were left to their own meditations.

Very grim and dark those meditations were in the case of De Catinat.
A stroke of good luck had made him at court, and now this other of ill
fortune had destroyed him.  It would be in vain that he should plead his
own powerlessness.  He knew his royal master well.  He was a man who was
munificent when his orders were obeyed, and inexorable when they
miscarried.  No excuse availed with him.  An unlucky man was as
abhorrent to him as a negligent one.  In this great crisis the king had
trusted him with an all-important message, and that message had not been
delivered.  What could save him now from disgrace and from ruin?
He cared nothing for the dim dungeon in which he found himself, nor for
the uncertain fate which hung over his head, but his heart turned to
lead when he thought of his blasted career, and of the triumph of those
whose jealousy had been aroused by his rapid promotion.  There were his
people in Paris, too--his sweet Adele, his old uncle, who had been as
good as a father to him.  What protector would they have in their
troubles now that he had lost the power that might have shielded them?
How long would it be before they were exposed once more to the
brutalities of Dalbert and his dragoons?  He clenched his teeth at the
thought, and threw himself down with a groan upon the litter of straw
dimly visible in the faint light which streamed through the single
window.

But his energetic comrade had yielded to no feeling of despondency.
The instant that the clang of the prison door had assured him that he
was safe from interruption he had slipped off the bonds which held him
and had felt all round the walls and flooring to see what manner of
place this might be.  His search had ended in the discovery of a small
fireplace at one corner, and of two great clumsy billets of wood, which
seemed to have been left there to serve as pillows for the prisoners.
Having satisfied himself that the chimney was so small that it was
utterly impossible to pass even his head up it, he drew the two blocks
of wood over to the window, and was able, by placing one above the other
and standing on tiptoe on the highest, to reach the bars which guarded
it.  Drawing himself up, and  fixing one toe in an inequality of the
wall, he managed to look out on to the courtyard which they had just
quitted.  The carriage and De Vivonne were passing out through the gate
as he looked, and he heard a moment later the slam of the heavy door and
the clatter of hoofs from the troop of horsemen outside.  The seneschal
and his retainers had disappeared; the torches, too, were gone, and,
save for the measured tread of a pair of sentinels in the yard twenty
feet beneath him, all was silent throughout the great castle.

And a very great castle it was.  Even as he hung there with straining
hands his eyes were running in admiration and amazement over the huge
wall in front of him, with its fringe of turrets and pinnacles and
battlements all lying so still and cold in the moonlight.  Strange
thoughts will slip into a man's head at the most unlikely moments.  He
remembered suddenly a bright summer day over the water when first he had
come down from Albany, and how his father had met him on the wharf by
the Hudson, and had taken him through the water-gate to see Peter
Stuyvesant's house, as a sign of how great this city was which had
passed from the Dutch to the English.  Why, Peter Stuyvesant's house and
Peter Stuyvesant's Bowery villa put together would not make one wing of
this huge pile, which was itself a mere dog-kennel beside the mighty
palace at Versailles.  He would that his father were here now;  and
then, on second thoughts, he would not, for it came back to him that he
was a prisoner in a far land, and that his sight-seeing was being done
through the bars of a dungeon window.

The window was large enough to pass his body through if it were not for
those bars.  He shook them and hung his weight upon them, but they were
as thick as his thumb and firmly welded.  Then, getting some strong hold
for his other foot, he supported himself by one hand while he picked
with his knife at the setting of the iron.  It was cement, as smooth as
glass and as hard as marble.  His knife turned when he tried to loosen
it.  But there was still the stone.  It was sandstone, not so very hard.
If he could cut grooves in it, he might be able to draw out bars,
cement, and all.  He sprang down to the floor again, and was thinking
how he should best set to work, when a groan drew his attention to his
companion.

"You seem sick, friend," said he.

"Sick in mind," moaned the other.  "Oh, the cursed fool that I have
been!  It maddens me!"

"Something on your mind?" said Amos Green, sitting down upon his billets
of wood.  "What was it, then?"

The guardsman made a movement of impatience.  "What was it?  How can you
ask me, when you know as well as I do the wretched failure of my
mission.  It was the king's wish that the archbishop should marry them.
The king's wish is the law.  It must be the archbishop or none.
He should have been at the palace by now.  Ah, my God! I can see the
king's cabinet, I can see him waiting, I can see madame waiting, I can
hear them speak of the unhappy De Catinat--" He buried his face in his
hands once more.

"I see all that," said the American stolidly, "and I see something
more."

"What then?"

"I see the archbishop tying them up together."

"The archbishop!  You are raving."

"Maybe.  But I see him."

"He could not be at the palace."

"On the contrary, he reached the palace about half an hour ago."

De Catinat sprang to his feet.  "At the palace!" he screamed.  "Then who
gave him the message?"

"I did," said Amos Green.



CHAPTER XVIII.


A NIGHT OF SURPRISES.

If the American had expected to surprise or delight his companion by
this curt announcement he was woefully disappointed, for De Catinat
approached him with a face which was full of sympathy and trouble, and
laid his hand caressingly upon his shoulder.

"My dear friend," said he, "I have been selfish and thoughtless.  I have
made too much of my own little troubles and too little of what you have
gone through for me.  That fall from your horse has shaken you more than
you think.  Lie down upon this straw, and see if a little sleep may
not--"

"I tell you that the bishop is there!" cried Amos Green impatiently.

"Quite so.  There is water in this jug, and if I dip my scarf into it
and tie it round your brow--"

"Man alive!  Don't you hear me!  The bishop is there."

"He is, he is," said De Catinat soothingly.  "He is most certainly
there.  I trust that you have no pain?"

The American waved in the air with his knotted fists.  "You think that I
am crazed," he cried, "and, by the eternal, you are enough to make me
so!  When I say that I sent the bishop, I mean that I saw to the job.
You remember when I stepped back to your friend the major?"

It was the soldier's turn to grow excited now.  "Well?" he cried,
gripping the other's arm.

"Well, when we send a scout into the woods, if the matter is worth it,
we send a second one at another hour, and so one or other comes back
with his hair on.  That's the Iroquois fashion, and a good fashion too."

"My God! I believe that you have saved me!"

"You needn't grip on to my arm like a fish-eagle on a trout!  I went
back to the major, then, and I asked him when he was in Paris to pass by
the archbishop's door."

"Well? Well?"

"I showed him this lump of chalk.  'If we've been there,' said I,
'you'll see a great cross on the left side of the door-post.  If there's
no cross, then pull the latch and ask the bishop if he'll come up to the
palace as quick as his horses can bring him.'  The major started an hour
after us; he would be in Paris by half-past ten; the bishop would be in
his carriage by eleven, and he would reach Versailles half an hour ago,
that is to say, about half-past twelve.  By the Lord, I think I've
driven him off his head!"

It was no wonder that the young woodsman was alarmed at the effect of
his own announcement.  His slow and steady nature was incapable of the
quick, violent variations of the fiery Frenchman.  De Catinat, who had
thrown off his bonds before he had lain down, spun round the cell now,
waving his arms and his legs, with his shadow capering up the wall
behind him, all distorted in the moonlight.  Finally he threw himself
into his comrade's arms with a torrent of thanks and ejaculations and
praises and promises, patting him with his hands and hugging him to his
breast.

"Oh, if I could but do something for you!" he exclaimed.  "If I could do
something for you!"

"You can, then.  Lie down on that straw and go to sleep."

"And to think that I sneered at you!  I!  Oh, you have had your
revenge!"

"For the Lord's sake, lie down and go to sleep!"  By persuasions and a
little pushing he got his delighted companion on to his couch again, and
heaped the straw over him to serve as a blanket.  De Catinat was wearied
out by the excitements of the day, and this last great reaction seemed
to have absorbed all his remaining strength.  His lids drooped heavily
over his eyes, his head sank deeper into the soft straw, and his last
remembrance was that the tireless American was seated cross-legged in
the moonlight, working furiously with his long knife upon one of the
billets of wood.

So weary was the young guardsman that it was long past noon, and the sun
was shining out of a cloudless blue sky, before he awoke.  For a moment,
enveloped as he was in straw, and with the rude arch of the dungeon
meeting in four rough-hewn groinings above his head, he stared about him
in bewilderment.  Then in an instant the doings of the day before, his
mission, the ambuscade, his imprisonment, all flashed back to him, and
he sprang to his feet.  His comrade, who had been dozing in the corner,
jumped up also at the first movement, with his hand on his knife, and a
sinister glance directed  towards the door.

"Oh, it's you, is it?" said he, "I thought it was the man."

"Has some one been in, then?"

"Yes; they brought those two loaves and a jug of water, just about dawn,
when I was settling down for a rest."

"And did he say anything?"

"No; it was the little black one."

"Simon, they called him."

"The same.  He laid the things down and was gone.  I thought that maybe
if he came again we might get him to stop."

"How, then?"

"Maybe if we got these stirrup leathers round his  ankles he would not
get them off quite as easy as we have done."

"And what then?"

"Well, he would tell us where we are, and what is to be done with us."

"Pshaw! what does it matter since our mission is done?"

"It may not matter to you--there's no accounting for tastes--but it
matters a good deal to me.  I'm not used to sitting in a hole, like a
bear in a trap, waiting for what other folks choose to do with me.
It's new to me.  I found Paris a pretty close sort of place, but it's a
prairie compared to this.  It don't suit a man of my habits, and I am
going to come out of it."

"There's no help but patience, my friend."

"I don't know that.  I'd get more help out of a bar and a few pegs."
He opened his coat, and took out a short piece of rusted iron, and three
small thick pieces of wood, sharpened at one end.

"Where did you get those, then?"

"These are my night's work.  The bar is the top one of the grate.  I had
a job to loosen it, but there it is.  The pegs I whittled out of that
log."

"And what are they for?"

"Well, you see, peg number one goes in here, where I have picked a hole
between the stones.  Then I've made this other log into a mallet, and
with two cracks there it is firm fixed, so that you can put your weight
on it.  Now these two go in the same way into the holes above here.
So!  Now, you see, you can stand up there and look out of that window
without asking too much of your toe joint.  Try it."

De Catinat sprang up and looked eagerly out between the bars.

"I do not know the place," said he, shaking his head.

"It may be any one of thirty castles which lie upon the south side of
Paris, and within six or seven leagues of it.  Which can it be?  And who
has any interest in treating us so?  I would that I could see a coat of
arms, which might help us.  Ah! there is one yonder in the centre of the
mullion of the window.  But I can scarce read it at the distance.
I warrant that your eyes are better than mine, Amos, and that you can
read what is on yonder escutcheon."

"On what?"

"On the stone slab in the centre window."

"Yes, I see it plain enough.  It looks to me like three turkey-buzzards
sitting on a barrel of molasses."

"Three allurions in chief over a tower proper, maybe.  Those are the
arms of the Provence De Hautevilles.  But it cannot be that.  They have
no chateau within a hundred leagues.  No, I cannot tell where we are."

He was dropping back to the floor, and put his weight upon the bar.
To his amazement, it came away in his hand.

"Look, Amos, look!" he cried.

"Ah, you've found it out!  Well, I did that during the night."

"And how?  With your knife?"

"No; I could make no way with my knife; but when I got the bar out of
the grate, I managed faster.  I'll put this one back now, or some of
those folks down below may notice that we have got it loose."

"Are they all loose?"

"Only the one at present, but we'll get the other two out during the
night.  You can take that bar out and work with it, while I use my own
picker at the other.  You see, the stone is soft, and by grinding it you
soon make a groove along which you can slip the bar.  It will be mighty
queer if we can't clear a road for ourselves before morning."

"Well, but even if we could get out into the courtyard, where could we
turn to then?"

"One thing at a time, friend.  You might as well stick at the Kennebec
because you could not see how you would cross the Penobscot.  Anyway,
there is more air in the yard than in here, and when the window is clear
we shall soon plan out the rest."

The two comrades did not dare to do any work during the day, for fear
they should be surprised by the jailer, or observed from without.
No one came near them, but they ate their loaves and drank their water
with the appetite of men who had often known what it was to be without
even such simple food as that.  The instant that night fell they were
both up upon the pegs, grinding away at the hard stone and tugging at
the bars.  It was a rainy night, and there was a sharp thunder-storm,
but they could see very well, while the shadow of the arched window
prevented their being seen.  Before midnight they had loosened one bar,
and the other was just beginning to give, when some slight noise made
them turn their heads, and there was their jailer standing, open-mouthed
in the middle of the cell, staring up at them.

It was De Catinat who observed him first, and he sprang down at him in
an instant with his bar; but at his movement the man rushed for the
door, and drew it after him just as the American's tool whizzed past his
ear and down the passage.  As the door slammed, the two comrades looked
at each other.  The guardsman shrugged his shoulders and the other
whistled.

"It is scarce worth while to go on," said De Catinat.

"We may as well be doing that as anything else.  If my picker had been
an inch lower I'd have had him.  Well, maybe he'll get a stroke, or
break his neck down those stairs.  I've nothing to work with now, but a
few rubs with your bar will finish the job.  Ah, dear!  You are right,
and we are fairly treed!"

A great bell had begun to ring in the chateau, and there was a loud buzz
of voices and a clatter of feet upon the stones.  Hoarse orders were
shouted, and there was the sound of turning keys.  All this coming
suddenly in the midst of the stillness of the night showed only too
certainly that the alarm had been given.  Amos Green threw himself down
in the straw, with his hands in his pockets, and De Catinat leaned
sulkily against the wall, waiting for whatever might come to him.
Five minutes passed, however, and yet another five minutes, without
anyone appearing.  The hubbub in the courtyard continued, but there was
no sound in the corridor which led to their cell.

"Well, I'll have that bar out, after all," said the American at last,
rising and stepping over to the window.  "Anyhow, we'll see what all
this caterwauling is about."  He climbed up on his pegs as he spoke, and
peeped out.

"Come up!" he cried excitedly to his comrade.  "They've got some other
game going on here, and they are all a deal too busy to bother their
heads about us."

De Catinat clambered up beside him, and the two stood staring down into
the courtyard.  A brazier had been lit at each corner, and the place was
thronged with men, many of whom carried torches.  The yellow glare
played fitfully over the grim gray walls, flickering up sometimes until
the highest turrets shone golden against the black sky, and then, as the
wind caught them, dying away until they scarce threw a glow upon the
cheek of their bearer.  The main gate was open, and a carriage, which
had apparently just driven in, was standing at a small door immediately
in front of their window.  The wheels and sides were brown with mud, and
the two horses were reeking and heavy-headed, as though their journey
had been both swift and long.  A man wearing a plumed hat and enveloped
in a riding-coat had stepped from the carriage, and then, turning round,
had dragged a second person out after him.  There was a scuffle, a cry,
a push, and the two figures had vanished through the door.  As it
closed, the carriage drove away, the torches and braziers were
extinguished, the main gate was closed once more, and all was as quiet
as before this sudden interruption.

"Well!" gasped De Catinat.  "Is this another king's messenger they've
got?"

"There will be lodgings for two more here in a short time," said Amos
Green.  "If they only leave us alone, this cell won't hold us long."

"I wonder where that jailer has gone?"

"He may go where he likes, as long as he keeps away from here.  Give me
your bar again.  This thing is giving.  It won't take us long to have it
out."  He set to work furiously, trying to deepen the groove in the
stone, through which he hoped to drag the staple.  Suddenly he ceased,
and strained his ears.

"By thunder!" said he, "there's some one working on the other side."

They both stood listening.  There were the thud of hammers, the rasping
of a saw, and the clatter of wood from the other side of the wall.

"What can they be doing?"

"I can't think."

"Can you see them?"

"They are too near the wall."

"I think I can manage," said De Catinat.  "I am slighter than you." He
pushed his head and neck and half of one shoulder through the gap
between the bars, and there he remained until his friend thought that
perhaps he had stuck, and pulled at his legs to extricate him.
He writhed back, however, without any difficulty.

"They are building something," he whispered.

"Building!"

"Yes; there are four of them, with a lantern."

"What can they be building, then?"

"It's a shed, I think.  I can see four sockets in the ground, and they
are fixing four uprights into them."

"Well, we can't get away as long as there are four men just under our
window."

"Impossible."

"But we may as well finish our work, for all that."  The gentle
scrapings of his iron were drowned amid the noise which swelled ever
louder from without.  The bar loosened at the end, and he drew it slowly
towards him.  At that instant, however, just as he was disengaging it, a
round head appeared between him and the moonlight, a head with a great
shock of tangled hair and a woollen cap upon the top of it.
So astonished was Amos Green at the sudden apparition that he let go his
grip upon the bar, which, falling outwards, toppled over the edge of the
window-sill.

"You great fool!" shrieked a voice from below, "are your fingers ever to
be thumbs, then, that you should fumble your tools so?  A thousand
thunders of heaven!  You have broken my shoulder."

"What is it, then?" cried the other.  "My faith, Pierre, if your fingers
went as fast as your tongue, you would be the first joiner in France."

"What is it, you ape!  You have dropped your tool upon me."

"I!  I have dropped nothing."

"Idiot!  Would you have me believe that iron falls from the sky?  I say
that you have struck me, you foolish, clumsy-fingered lout."

"I have not struck you yet," cried the other, "but, by the Virgin, if I
have more of this I will come down the ladder to you!"

"Silence, you good-for-naughts!" said a third voice sternly.  "If the
work be not done by daybreak, there will be a heavy reckoning for
somebody."

And again the steady hammering and sawing went forward.  The head still
passed and repassed, its owner walking apparently upon some platform
which they had constructed beneath their window, but never giving a
glance or a thought to the black square opening beside him.  It was
early morning, and the first cold light was beginning to steal over the
courtyard, before the work was at last finished and the workmen had
left.  Then at last the prisoners dared to climb up and to see what it
was which had been constructed during the night.  It gave them a catch
of the breath as they looked at it.  It was a scaffold.

There it lay, the ill-omened platform of dark greasy boards newly
fastened together, but evidently used often before for the same purpose.
It was buttressed up against their wall, and extended a clear twenty
feet out, with a broad wooden stair leading down from the further side.
In the centre stood a headsman's block, all haggled at the top, and
smeared with rust-coloured stains.

"I think it is time that we left," said Amos Green.

"Our work is all in vain, Amos," said De Catinat sadly.

"Whatever our fate may be--and this looks ill enough--we can but submit
to it like brave men."

"Tut, man; the window is clear!  Let us make a rush for it."

"It is useless.  I can see a line of armed men along the further side
of the yard."

"A line! At this hour!"

"Yes; and here come more.  See, at the centre gate!  Now what in the
name of heaven is this?"

As he spoke the door which faced them opened and a singular procession
filed out.  First came two dozen footmen, walking in pairs, all carrying
halberds, and clad in the same maroon-coloured liveries.  After them a
huge bearded man, with his tunic off, and the sleeves of his coarse
shirt rolled up over his elbows, strode along with a great axe over his
left shoulder.  Behind him, a priest with an open missal pattered forth
prayers, and in his shadow was a woman, clad in black, her neck bared,
and a black shawl cast over her head and drooping in front of her bowed
face.  Within grip of her walked a tall, thin, fierce-faced man, with
harsh red features, and a great jutting nose.  He wore a flat velvet cap
with a single eagle feather fastened into it by a diamond clasp, which
gleamed in the morning light.  But bright as was his gem, his dark eyes
were brighter still, and sparkled from under his bushy brows with a mad
brilliancy which bore with it something of menace and of terror.
His limbs jerked as he walked, his features twisted, and he carried
himself like a man who strives hard to hold himself in when his whole
soul is aflame with exultation.  Behind him again twelve more
maroon-clad retainers brought up the rear of this singular procession.

The woman had faltered at the foot of the scaffold, but the man behind
her had thrust her forward with such force that she stumbled over the
lower step, and would have fallen had she not clutched at the arm of the
priest.  At the top of the ladder her eyes met the dreadful block, and
she burst into a scream, and shrunk backwards.  But again the man thrust
her on, and two of the followers caught her by either wrist and dragged
her forwards.

"Oh, Maurice!  Maurice!" she screamed.  "I am not fit to die!
Oh, forgive me, Maurice, as you hope for forgiveness yourself! Maurice!
Maurice!"  She strove to get towards him, to clutch at his wrist, at his
sleeve, but he stood with his hand on his sword, gazing at her with a
face which was all wreathed and contorted with merriment.  At the sight
of that dreadful mocking face the prayers froze upon her lips.  As well
pray for mercy to the dropping stone or to the rushing stream.  She
turned away, and threw back the mantle which had shrouded her features.

"Ah, sire!" she cried.  "Sire!  If you could see me now!"

And at the cry and at the sight of that fair pale face, De Catinat,
looking down from the window, was stricken as though by a dagger; for
there, standing beside the headsman's block, was she who had been the
most powerful, as well as the wittiest and the fairest, of the women of
France--none other than Francoise de Montespan, so lately the favourite
of the king.



CHAPTER XIX.


IN THE KING'S CABINET.

On the night upon which such strange chances had befallen his
messengers, the king sat alone in his cabinet.  Over his head a perfumed
lamp, held up by four little flying Cupids of crystal, who dangled by
golden chains from the painted ceiling, cast a brilliant light upon the
chamber, which was flashed back twenty-fold by the mirrors upon the
wall.  The ebony and silver furniture, the dainty carpet of La
Savonniere, the silks of Tours, the tapestries of the Gobelins, the
gold-work and the delicate chinaware of Sevres--the best of all that
France could produce was centred between these four walls.  Nothing had
ever passed through that door which was not a masterpiece of its kind.
And amid all this brilliance the master of it sat, his chin resting upon
his hands, his elbows upon the table, with eyes which stared vacantly at
the wall, a moody and a solemn man.

But though his dark eyes were fixed upon the wall, they saw nothing of
it.  They looked rather down the long vista of his own life, away to
those early years when what we dream and what we do shade so mistily
into one another.  Was it a dream or was it a fact, those two men who
used to stoop over his baby crib, the one with the dark coat and the
star upon his breast, whom he had been taught to call father, and the
other one with the long red gown and the little twinkling eyes?
Even now, after more than forty years, that wicked, astute, powerful
face flashed up, and he saw once more old Richelieu, the great
unanointed king of France.  And then the other cardinal, the long lean
one who had taken his pocket-money, and had grudged him his food, and
had dressed him in old clothes.  How well he could recall the day when
Mazarin had rouged himself for the last time, and how the court had
danced with joy at the news that he was no more!  And his mother, too,
how beautiful she was, and how masterful!  Could he not remember how
bravely she had borne herself during that war in which the power of the
great nobles had been broken, and how she had at last lain down to die,
imploring the priests not to stain her cap-strings with their holy oils!
And then he thought of what he had done himself, how he had shorn down
his great subjects until, instead of being like a tree among saplings,
he had been alone, far above all others, with his shadow covering the
whole land.  Then there were his wars and his laws and his treaties.
Under his care France had overflowed her frontiers both on the north and
on the east, and yet had been so welded together internally that she had
but one voice, with which she spoke through him.  And then there was
that line of beautiful faces which wavered up in front of him.  There
was Olympe de Mancini, whose Italian eyes had first taught him that
there is a power which can rule over a king; her sister, too, Marie de
Mancini; his wife, with her dark little sun-browned face; Henrietta of
England, whose death had first shown him the horrors which lie in life;
La Valliere, Montespan, Fontanges.  Some were dead; some were in
convents.  Some who had been wicked and beautiful were now only wicked.
And what had been the outcome of all this troubled, striving life of
his?  He was already at the outer verge of his middle years; he had lost
his taste for the pleasures of his youth; gout and vertigo were ever at
his foot and at his head to remind him that between them lay a kingdom
which he could not hope to govern.  And after all these years he had not
won a single true friend, not one, in his family, in his court, in his
country, save only this woman whom he was to wed that night.  And she,
how patient she was, how good, how lofty!  With her he might hope to
wipe off by the true glory of his remaining years all the sin and the
folly of the past.  Would that the archbishop might come, that he might
feel that she was indeed his, that he held her with hooks of steel which
would bind them as long as life should last!

There came a tap at the door.  He sprang up eagerly, thinking that the
ecclesiastic might have arrived.  It was, however, only his personal
attendant, to say that Louvois would crave an interview.  Close at his
heels came the minister himself, high-nosed and heavy-chinned.
Two leather bags were dangling from his hand.

"Sire," said he, when Bontems had retired, "I trust that I do not
intrude upon you."

"No, no, Louvois.  My thoughts were in truth beginning to be very
indifferent company, and I am glad to be rid of them."

"Your Majesty's thoughts can never, I am sure, be anything but
pleasant," said the courtier.  "But I have brought you here something
which I trust may make them even more so."

"Ah!  What is that?"

"When so many of our young nobles went into Germany and Hungary, you
were pleased in your wisdom to say that you would like well to see what
reports they sent home to their friends; also what news was sent out
from the court to them."

"Yes."

"I have them here--all that the courier has brought in, and all that are
gathered to go out, each in its own bag.  The wax has been softened in
spirit, the fastenings have been steamed, and they are now open."

The king took out a handful of the letters and glanced at the addresses.

"I should indeed like to read the hearts of these people," said he.
"Thus only can I tell the true thoughts of those who bow and simper
before my face.  I suppose," with a sudden flash of suspicion from his
eyes, "that you have not yourself looked into these?"

"Oh, sire, I had rather die!"

"You swear it?"

"As I hope for salvation!"

"Hum! There is one among these which I see is from your own son."

Louvois changed colour, and stammered as he looked at the envelope.
"Your Majesty will find that he is as loyal out of your presence as in
it, else he is no son of mine," said he.

"Then we shall begin with his.  Ha! it is but ten lines long.  'Dearest
Achille, how I long for you to come back!  The court is as dull as a
cloister now that you are gone.  My ridiculous father still struts about
like a turkey-cock, as if all his medals and crosses could cover the
fact that he is but a head lackey, with no more real power than I have.
He wheedles a good deal out of the king, but what he does with it I
cannot imagine, for little comes my way.  I still owe those ten thousand
livres to the man in the Rue Orfevre.  Unless I have some luck at
lansquenet, I shall have to come out soon and join you.'  Hem!  I did
you an injustice, Louvois.  I see that you have _not_ looked over these
letters."

The minister had sat with a face which was the colour of beetroot, and
eyes which projected from his head, while this epistle was being read.
It was with relief that he came to the end of it, for at least there was
nothing which compromised him seriously with the king; but every nerve
in his great body tingled with rage as he thought of the way in which
his young scape-grace had alluded to him.  "The viper!" he cried.
"Oh, the foul snake in the grass!  I will make him curse the day that he
was born."

"Tut, tut, Louvois!" said the king.  "You are a man who has seen much of
life, and you should be a philosopher.  Hot-headed youth says ever more
than it means.  Think no more of the matter.  But what have we here?
A letter from my dearest girl to her husband, the Prince de Conti.
I would pick her writing out of a thousand.  Ah, dear soul, she little
thought that my eyes would see her artless prattle!  Why should I read
it, since I already know every thought of her innocent heart?"  He
unfolded the sheet of pink scented paper with a fond smile upon his
face, but it faded away as his eyes glanced down the page, and he sprang
to his feet with a snarl of anger, his hand over his heart and his eyes
still glued to the paper.  "Minx!" he cried, in a choking voice.
"Impertinent, heartless minx! Louvois, you know what I have done for the
princess.  You know she has been the apple of my eye.  What have I ever
grudged her? What have I ever denied her?"

"You have been goodness itself, sire," said Louvois, whose own wounds
smarted less now that he saw his master writhing.

"Hear what she says of me: 'Old Father Grumpy is much as usual, save
that he gives a little at the knees.  You remember how we used to laugh
at his airs and graces!  Well, he has given up all that, and though he
still struts about on great high heels, like a Landes peasant on his
stilts, he has no brightness at all in his clothes.  Of course, all the
court follow his example, so you can imagine what a nightmare place this
is.  Then this woman still keeps in favour, and her frocks are as dismal
as Grumpy's coats; so when you come back we shall go into the country
together, and you shall dress in red velvet, and I shall wear blue silk,
and we shall have a little coloured court of our own in spite of my
majestic papa.'"

Louis sank his face in his hands.

"You hear how she speaks of me, Louvois."

"It is infamous, sire; infamous!"

"She calls me names--_me_, Louvois!"

"Atrocious, sire."

"And my knees! one would think that I was an old man!"

"Scandalous.  But, sire, I would beg to say that it is a case in which
your Majesty's philosophy may well soften your anger.  Youth is ever
hot-headed, and says more than it means.  Think no more of the matter."

"You speak like a fool, Louvois.  The child that I have loved turns upon
me, and you ask me to think no more of it.  Ah, it is one more lesson
that a king can trust least of all those who have his own blood in their
veins.  What writing is this?  It is the good Cardinal de Bouillon.
One may not have faith in one's own kin, but this sainted man loves me,
not only because I have placed him where he is, but because it is his
nature to look up to and love those whom God has placed above him.
I will read you his letter, Louvois, to show you that there is still
such a thing as loyalty and gratitude in France.  'My dear Prince de la
Roche-sur-Yon.'  Ah, it is to him he writes.  'I promised when you left
that I would let you know from time to time how things were going at
court, as you consulted me about bringing your daughter up from Anjou,
in the hope that she might catch the king's fancy.'  What!  What!
Louvois!  What villainy is this? 'The sultan goes from bad to worse.
The Fontanges was at least the prettiest woman in France, though between
ourselves there was just a shade too much of the red in her hair--an
excellent colour in a cardinal's gown, my dear duke, but nothing
brighter than chestnut is permissible in a lady.  The Montespan, too,
was a fine woman in her day, but fancy his picking up now with a widow
who is older than himself, a woman, too, who does not even try to make
herself attractive, but kneels at her _prie-dieu_ or works at her
tapestry from morning to night.  They say that December and May make a
bad match, but my own opinion is that two Novembers make an even worse
one.'  Louvois!  Louvois!  I can read no more!  Have you a _lettre de
cachet_?"

"There is one here, sire."

"For the Bastille?"

"No; for Vincennes."

"That will do very well.  Fill it up, Louvois!  Put this villain's name
in it!  Let him be arrested to-night, and taken there in his own
caleche.  The shameless, ungrateful, foul-mouthed villain!  Why did you
bring me these letters, Louvois?  Oh, why did you yield to my foolish
whim?  My God, is there no truth, or honour, or loyalty in the world?"
He stamped his feet, and shook his clenched hands in the air in the
frenzy of his anger and disappointment.

"Shall I, then, put back the others?" asked Louvois eagerly.  He had
been on thorns since the king had begun to read them, not knowing what
disclosures might come next.

"Put them back, but keep the bag."

"Both bags?"

"Ah! I had forgot the other one.  Perhaps if I have hypocrites around
me, I have at least some honest subjects at a distance.  Let us take one
haphazard.  Who is this from?  Ah! it is from the Duc de la
Rochefoucauld.  He has ever seemed to be a modest and dutiful young man.
What has he to say? The Danube--Belgrade--the grand vizier--Ah!"
He gave a cry as if he had been stabbed.

"What, then, sire?"  The minister had taken a step forward, for he was
frightened by the expression upon the king's face.

"Take them away, Louvois!  Take them away!" he cried, pushing the pile
of papers away from him.  "I would that I had never seen them!  I will
look at them no more!  He gibes even at my courage, I who was in the
trenches when he was in his cradle!  'This war would not suit the king,'
he says.  'For there are battles, and none of the nice little safe
sieges which are so dear to him.'  By God, he shall pay to me with his
head for that jest!  Ay, Louvois, it will be a dear gibe to him.
But take them away.  I have seen as much as I can bear."

The minister was thrusting them back into the bag when suddenly his eye
caught the bold, clear writing of Madame de Maintenon upon one of the
letters.  Some demon whispered to him that here was a weapon which had
been placed in his hands, with which he might strike one whose very name
filled him with jealousy and hatred.  Had she been guilty of some
indiscretion in this note, then he might even now, at this last hour,
turn the king's heart against her.  He was an astute man, and in an
instant he had seen his chance and grasped it.

"Ha!" said he, "it was hardly necessary to open this one."

"Which, Louvois?  Whose is it?"

The minister pushed forward the letter, and Louis started as his eyes
fell upon it.

"Madame's writing!" he gasped.

"Yes; it is to her nephew in Germany."

Louis took it in his hand.  Then, with a sudden motion, he threw it down
among the others, and then yet again his hand stole towards it.
His face was gray and haggard, and beads of moisture had broken out upon
his brow.  If this too were to prove to be as the others! He was shaken
to the soul at the very thought.  Twice he tried to pluck it out, and
twice his trembling fingers fumbled with the paper.  Then he tossed it
over to Louvois.  "Read it to me," said he.

The minister opened the letter out and flattened it upon the table, with
a malicious light dancing in his eyes, which might have cost him his
position had the king but read it aright.

"'My dear nephew,'" he read, "'what you ask me in your last is
absolutely impossible.  I have never abused the king's favour so far as
to ask for any profit for myself, and I should be equally sorry to
solicit any advance for my relatives.  No one would rejoice more than I
to see you rise to be major in your regiment, but your valour and your
loyalty must be the cause, and you must not hope to do it through any
word of mine.  To serve such a man as the king is its own reward, and I
am sure that whether you remain a cornet or rise to some higher rank,
you will be equally zealous in his cause.  He is surrounded, unhappily,
by many base parasites.  Some of these are mere fools, like Lauzun;
others are knaves, like the late Fouquet; and some seem to be both fools
and knaves, like Louvois, the minister of war.'"  Here the reader choked
with rage, and sat gurgling and drumming his fingers upon the table.

"Go on, Louvois, go on," said Louis, smiling up at the ceiling.

"'These are the clouds which surround the sun, my dear nephew; but the
sun is, believe me, shining brightly behind them.  For years I have
known that noble nature as few others can know it, and I can tell you
that his virtues are his own, but that if ever his glory is for an
instant dimmed over, it is because his kindness of heart has allowed him
to be swayed by those who are about him.  We hope soon to see you back
at Versailles, staggering under the weight of your laurels.  Meanwhile
accept my love and every wish for your speedy promotion, although it
cannot be obtained in the way which you suggest.'"

"Ah," cried the king, his love shining in his eyes, "how could I for an
instant doubt her!  And yet I had been so shaken by the others!
Francoise is as true as steel.  Was it not a beautiful letter, Louvois?"

"Madame is a very clever woman," said the minister evasively.

"And such a reader of hearts!  Has she not seen my character aright?"

"At least she has not read mine, sire."

There was a tap at the door, and Bontems peeped in.  "The archbishop has
arrived, sire."

"Very well, Bontems.  Ask madame to be so good as to step this way.
And order the witnesses to assemble in the ante-room."

As the valet hastened away, Louis turned to his minister: "I wish you to
be one of the witnesses, Louvois."

"To what, sire?"

"To my marriage."

The minister started.  "What, sire!  Already?"

"Now, Louvois; within five minutes."

"Very good, sire."  The unhappy courtier strove hard to assume a more
festive manner; but the night had been full of vexation to him, and to
be condemned to assist in making this woman the king's wife was the most
bitter drop of all.

"Put these letters away, Louvois.  The last one has made up for all the
rest.  But these rascals shall smart for it, all the same.  By-the-way,
there is that young nephew to whom madame wrote.  Gerard d'Aubigny is
his name, is it not?"

"Yes, sire."

"Make him out a colonel's commission, and give him the next vacancy,
Louvois."

"A colonel, sire!  Why, he is not yet twenty."

"Ay, Louvois.  Pray, am I the chief of the army, or are you?  Take care,
Louvois!  I have warned you once before.  I tell you, man, that if I
choose to promote one of my jack-boots to be the head of a brigade, you
shall not hesitate to make out the papers.  Now go into the ante-room,
and wait with the other witnesses until you are wanted."

There had meanwhile been busy goings-on in the small room where the red
lamp burned in front of the Virgin.  Francoise de Maintenon stood in the
centre, a little flush of excitement on her cheeks, and an unwonted
light in her placid gray eyes.  She was clad in a dress of shining white
brocade, trimmed and slashed with silver serge, and fringed at the
throat and arms with costly point lace.  Three women, grouped around
her, rose and stooped and swayed, putting a touch here and a touch
there, gathering in, looping up, and altering until all was to their
taste.

"There!" said the head dressmaker, giving a final pat to a rosette of
gray silk; "I think that will do, your Majes--that is to say, madame."

The lady smiled at the adroit slip of the courtier dressmaker.

"My tastes lean little towards dress," said she, "yet I would fain look
as he would wish me to look."

"Ah, it is easy to dress madame.  Madame has a figure.  Madame has a
carriage.  What costume would not look well with such a neck and waist
and arm to set it off?  But, ah, madame, what are we to do when we have
to make the figure as well as the dress?  There was the Princess
Charlotte Elizabeth.  It was but yesterday that we cut her gown.  She
was short, madame, but thick.  Oh, it is incredible how thick she was!
She uses more cloth than madame, though she is two hand-breadths
shorter.  Ah, I am sure that the good God never meant people to be as
thick as that.  But then, of course, she is Bavarian and not French."

But madame was paying little heed to the gossip of the dressmaker.
Her eyes were fixed upon the statue in the corner, and her lips were
moving in prayer--prayer that she might be worthy of this great destiny
which had come so suddenly upon her, a poor governess; that she might
walk straight among the pitfalls which surrounded her upon every side;
that this night's work might bring a blessing upon France and upon the
man whom she loved.  There came a discreet tap at the door to break in
upon her prayer.

"It is Bontems, madame," said Mademoiselle Nanon.  "He says that the
king is ready."

"Then we shall not keep him waiting.  Come, mademoiselle, and may God
shed His blessing upon what we are about to do!"

The little party assembled in the king's ante-room, and started from
there to the private chapel.  In front walked the portly bishop, clad in
a green vestment, puffed out with the importance of the function, his
missal in his hand, and his fingers between the pages at the service
_de matrimoniis_.  Beside him strode his almoner, and two little
servitors of the court in crimson cassocks bearing lighted torches.
The king and Madame de Maintenon walked side by side, she quiet and
composed, with gentle bearing and downcast eyes, he with a flush on his
dark cheeks, and a nervous, furtive look in his eyes, like a man who
knows that he is in the midst of one of the great crises of his life.
Behind them, in solemn silence, followed a little group of chosen
witnesses, the lean, silent Pere la Chaise, Louvois, scowling heavily at
the bride,  the Marquis de Charmarante, Bontems, and Mademoiselle Nanon.

The torches shed a strong yellow light upon this small band as they
advanced slowly through the corridors and _salons_ which led to the
chapel, and they threw a garish glare upon the painted walls and
ceilings, flashing back from gold-work and from mirror, but leaving long
trailing shadows in the corners.  The king glanced nervously at these
black recesses, and at the portraits of his ancestors and relations
which lined the walls.  As he passed that of his late queen, Maria
Theresa, he started and gasped with horror.

"My God!" he whispered; "she frowned and spat at me!"

Madame laid her cool hand upon his wrist.  "It is nothing, sire," she
murmured, in her soothing voice.  "It was but the light flickering over
the picture."

Her words had their usual effect upon him.  The startled look died away
from his eyes, and taking her hand in his he walked resolutely forwards.
A minute later they were before the altar, and the words were being read
which should bind them forever together.  As they turned away again, her
new ring blazing upon her finger, there was a buzz of congratulation
around her.  The king only said nothing, but he looked at her, and she
had no wish that he should say more.  She was still calm and pale, but
the blood throbbed in her temples.  "You are Queen of France now," it
seemed to be humming--"queen, queen, queen!"

But a sudden shadow had fallen across her, and a low voice was in her
ear.  "Remember your promise to the Church," it whispered.  She started,
and turned to see the pale, eager face of the Jesuit beside her.

"Your hand has turned cold, Francoise," said Louis.  "Let us go,
dearest.  We have been too long in this dismal church."



CHAPTER XX.


THE TWO FRANCOISES.

Madame de Montespan had retired to rest, easy in her mind, after
receiving the message from her brother.  She knew Louis as few others
knew him, and she was well aware of that obstinacy in trifles which was
one of his characteristics.  If he had said that he would be married by
the archbishop, then the archbishop it must be; to-night, at least,
there should be no marriage.  To-morrow was a new day, and if it did not
shake the king's plans, then indeed she must have lost her wit as well
as her beauty.

She dressed herself with care in the morning, putting on her powder, her
little touch of rouge, her one patch near the dimple of her cheek, her
loose robe of violet velvet, and her casconet of pearls with all the
solicitude of a warrior, who is bracing on his arms for a life and death
contest.  No news had come to her of the great event of the previous
night, although the court already rang with it, for her haughtiness and
her bitter tongue had left her without a friend or intimate.  She rose,
therefore, in the best of spirits, with her mind set on the one question
as to how best she could gain an audience with the king.

She was still in her boudoir putting the last touches to her toilet when
her page announced to her that the king was waiting in her _salon_.
Madame de Montespan could hardly believe in such good fortune.  She had
racked her brain all morning as to how she should win her way to him,
and here he was waiting for her.  With a last glance at the mirror, she
hastened to meet him.

He was standing with his back turned, looking up at one of Snyders's
paintings, when she entered; but as she closed the door, he turned and
took two steps towards her.  She had run forward with a pretty little
cry of joy, her white arms outstretched, and love shining on her face;
but he put out his hand, gently and yet with decision, with a gesture
which checked her approach.  Her hands dropped to her side, her lip
trembled, and she stood looking at him with her grief and her fears all
speaking loudly from her eyes.  There was a look upon his features which
she had never seen before, and already something was whispering at the
back of her soul that to-day at least his spirit was stronger than her
own.

"You are angry with me again," she cried.

He had come with every intention of beginning the interview by telling
her bluntly of his marriage; but now, as he looked upon her beauty and
her love, he felt that it would have been less brutal to strike her down
at his feet.  Let some one else tell her, then.  She would know soon
enough.  Besides, there would be less chance then of a scene, which was
a thing abhorrent to his soul.  His task was, in any case, quite
difficult enough.  All this ran swiftly through his mind, and she as
swiftly read it off in the brown eyes which gazed at her.

"You have something you came to say, and now you have not the heart to
say it.  God bless the kindly heart which checks the cruel tongue."

"No, no, madame," said Louis; "I would not be cruel.  I cannot forget
that my life has been brightened and my court made brilliant during all
these years by your wit and your beauty.  But times change, madame, and
I owe a duty to the world which overrides my own personal inclinations.
For every reason I think that it is best that we should arrange in the
way which we discussed the other day, and that you should withdraw
yourself from the court."

"Withdraw, sire! For how long?"

"It must be a permanent withdrawal, madame."

She stood with clenched hands and a pale face staring at him.

"I need not say that I shall make your retirement a happy one as far as
in me lies.  Your allowance shall be fixed by yourself; a palace shall
be erected for you in whatever part of France you may prefer, provided
that it is twenty miles from Paris.  An estate also--"

"Oh, sire, how can you think that such things as these would compensate
me for the loss of your love?"  Her heart had turned to lead within her
breast.  Had he spoken hotly and angrily she might have hoped to turn
him as she had done before; but this gentle and yet firm bearing was new
to him, and she felt that all her arts were vain against it.  His
coolness enraged her, and yet she strove to choke down her passion and
to preserve the humble attitude which was least natural to her haughty
and vehement spirit; but soon the effort became too much for her.

"Madame," said he, "I have thought well over this matter, and it must be
as I say.  There is no other way at all.  Since we must part, the
parting had best be short and sharp.  Believe me, it is no pleasant
matter for me either.  I have ordered your brother to have his carriage
at the postern at nine o'clock, for I thought that perhaps you would
wish to retire after nightfall."

"To hide my shame from a laughing court!  It was thoughtful of you,
sire.  And yet, perhaps, this too was a duty, since we hear so much of
duties nowadays, for who was it but you--"

"I know, madame, I know.  I confess it.  I have wronged you deeply.
Believe me that every atonement which is in my power shall be made.
Nay, do not look so angrily at me, I beg.  Let our last sight of each
other be one which may leave a pleasant memory behind it."

"A pleasant memory!"  All the gentleness and humility had fallen from
her now, and her voice had the hard ring of contempt and of anger.
"A pleasant memory!  It may well be pleasant to you, who are released
from the woman whom you ruined, who can turn now to another without any
pale face to be seen within the _salons_ of your court to remind you of
your perfidy.  But to me, pining in some lonely country house, spurned
by my husband, despised by my family, the scorn and jest of France, far
from all which gave a charm to life, far from the man for whose love I
have sacrificed everything--this will be a very pleasant memory to me,
you may be sure!"

The king's eyes had caught the angry gleam which shot from hers, and yet
he strove hard to set a curb upon his temper.  When such a matter had to
be discussed between the proudest man and the haughtiest woman in all
France, one or the other must yield a point.  He felt that it was for
him to do so, and yet it did not come kindly to his imperious nature.

"There is nothing to be gained, madame," said he, "by using words which
are neither seemly for your tongue nor for my ears.  You will do me the
justice to confess that where I might command I am now entreating, and
that instead of ordering you as my subject, I am persuading you as my
friend."

"Oh, you show too much consideration, sire!  Our relations of twenty
years or so can scarce suffice to explain such forbearance from you.
I should indeed be grateful that you have not set your archers of the
guard upon me, or marched me from the palace between a file of your
musketeers.  Sire, how can I thank you for this forbearance?"
She curtsied low, with her face set in a mocking smile.

"Your words are bitter, madame."

"My heart is bitter, sire."

"Nay, Francoise, be reasonable, I implore you.  We have both left our
youth behind."

"The allusion to my years comes gratefully from your lips."

"Ah, you distort my words.  Then I shall say no more.  You may not see
me again, madame.  Is there no question which you would wish to ask me
before I go?"

"Good God!" she cried; "is this a man?  Has it a heart?  Are these the
lips which have told me so often that he loved me?  Are these the eyes
which have looked so fondly into mine?  Can you then thrust away a woman
whose life has been yours as you put away the St. Germain palace when a
more showy one was ready for you?  And this is the end of all those
vows, those sweet whispers, those persuasions, those promises--This!"

"Nay, madame, this is painful to both of us."

"Pain!  Where is the pain in your face?  I see anger in it because I
have dared to speak truth; I see joy in it because you feel that your
vile task is done.  But where is the pain?  Ah, when I am gone all will
be so easy to you--will it not?  You can go back then to your
governess--"

"Madame!"

"Yes, yes, you cannot frighten me!  What do I care for all that you can
do!  But I know all.  Do not think that I am blind.  And so you would
even have married her!  You, the descendant of St. Louis, and she the
Scarron widow, the poor drudge whom in charity I took into my household!
Ah, how your courtiers will smile! how the little poets will scribble!
how the wits will whisper!  You do not hear of these things, of course,
but they are a little painful for your friends."

"My patience can bear no more," cried the king furiously.  "I leave you,
madame, and forever."

But her fury had swept all fear and discretion from her mind.
She stepped between the door and him, her face flushed, her eyes
blazing, her face thrust a little forward, one small white satin slipper
tapping upon the carpet.

"You are in haste, sire!  She is waiting for you, doubtless."

"Let me pass, madame."

"But it was a disappointment last night, was it not, my poor sire?
Ah, and for the governess, what a blow!  Great heaven, what a blow!
No archbishop!  No marriage!  All the pretty plan gone wrong!  Was it
not cruel?"

Louis gazed at the beautiful furious face in bewilderment, and it
flashed across his mind that perhaps her grief had turned her brain.
What else could be the meaning of this wild talk of the archbishop and
the disappointment?  It would be unworthy of him to speak harshly to one
who was so afflicted.  He must soothe her, and, above all, he must get
away from her.

"You have had the keeping of a good many of my family jewels," said he.
"I beg that you will still retain them as a small sign of my regard."

He had hoped to please her and to calm her, but in an instant she was
over at her treasure-cupboard hurling double handfuls of precious stones
down at his feet.  They clinked and rattled, the little pellets of red
and yellow and green, rolling, glinting over the floor and rapping up
against the oak panels at the base of the walls.

"They will do for the governess if the archbishop comes at last," she
cried.

He was more convinced than ever that she had lost her wits.  A thought
struck him by which he might appeal to all that was softer and more
gentle in her nature.  He stepped swiftly to the door, pushed it half
open, and gave a whispered order.  A youth with long golden hair waving
down over his black velvet doublet entered the room.  It was her
youngest son, the Count of Toulouse.

"I thought that you would wish to bid him farewell," said Louis.

She stood staring as though unable to realise the significance of his
words.  Then it was borne suddenly in upon her that her children as well
as her lover were to be taken from her, that this other woman should see
them and speak with them and win their love while she was far away.
All that was evil and bitter in the woman flashed suddenly up in her,
until for the instant she was what the king had thought her.  If her son
was not for her, then he should be for none.  A jewelled knife lay among
her treasures, ready to her hand.  She caught it up and rushed at the
cowering lad.  Louis screamed and ran forward to stop her; but another
had been swifter than he.  A woman had darted through the open door, and
had caught the upraised wrist.  There was a moment's struggle, two
queenly figures swayed and strained, and the knife dropped between their
feet.  The frightened Louis caught it up, and seizing his little son by
the wrist, he rushed from the apartment.  Francoise de Montespan
staggered back against the ottoman to find herself confronted by the
steady eyes and set face of that other Francoise, the woman whose
presence fell like a shadow at every turn of her life.

"I have saved you, madame, from doing that which you would have been the
first to bewail."

"Saved me! It is you who have driven me to this!"

The fallen favourite leaned against the high back of the ottoman, her
hands resting behind her upon the curve of the velvet.  Her lids were
half closed on her flashing eyes, and her lips just parted to show a
gleam of her white teeth.  Here was the true Francoise de Montespan, a
feline creature crouching for a spring, very far from that humble and
soft-spoken Francoise who had won the king back by her gentle words.
Madame de Maintenon's hand had been cut in the struggle, and the blood
was dripping down from the end of her fingers, but neither woman had
time to spare a thought upon that.  Her firm gray eyes were fixed upon
her former rival as one fixes them upon some weak and treacherous
creature who may be dominated by a stronger will.

"Yes, it is you who have driven me to this--you, whom I picked up when
you were hard pressed for a crust of bread or a cup of sour wine.
What had you?  You had nothing--nothing except a name which was a
laughing-stock.  And what did I give you? I gave you everything.
You know that I gave you everything.  Money, position, the entrance to
the court.  You had them all from me.  And now you mock me!"

"Madame, I do not mock you.  I pity you from the bottom of my heart."

"Pity?  Ha! ha!  A Mortemart is pitied by the widow Scarron!
Your pity may go where your gratitude is, and where your character is.
We shall be troubled with it no longer then."

"Your words do not pain me."

"I can believe that you are not sensitive."

"Not when my conscience is at ease."

"Ah! it has not troubled you, then?"

"Not upon this point, madame."

"My God!  How terrible must those other points have been!"

"I have never had an evil thought towards you."

"None towards me?  Oh, woman, woman!"

"What have I done, then?  The king came to my room to see the children
taught.  He stayed.  He talked.  He asked my opinion on this and that.
Could I be silent? or could I say other than what I thought?"

"You turned him against me!"

"I should be proud indeed if I thought that I had turned him to virtue."

"The word comes well from your lips."

"I would that I heard it upon yours."

"And so, by your own confession, you stole the king's love from me, most
virtuous of widows!"

"I had all gratitude and kindly thought for you.  You have, as you have
so often reminded me, been my benefactress.  It was not necessary for
you to say it, for I had never for an instant forgotten it.  Yet if the
king has asked me what I thought, I will not deny to you that I have
said that sin is sin, and that he would be a worthier man if he shook
off the guilty bonds which held him."

"Or exchanged them for others."

"For those of duty."

"Pah! Your hypocrisy sickens me!  If you pretend to be a nun, why are
you not where the nuns are?  You would have the best of two worlds--
would you not?--have all that the court can give, and yet ape the
manners of the cloister.  But you need not do it with me!  I know you as
your inmost heart knows you.  I was honest, and what I did, I did before
the world.  You, behind your priests and your directors and your
_prie-dieus_ and your missals--do you think that you deceive me, as you
deceive others?"

Her antagonist's gray eyes sparkled for the first time, and she took a
quick step forward, with one white hand half lifted in rebuke.

"You may speak as you will of me," said she.  "To me it is no more than
the foolish paroquet that chatters in your ante-room.  But do not touch
upon things which are sacred.  Ah, if you would but raise your own
thoughts to such things--if you would but turn them inwards, and see,
before it is too late, how vile and foul is this life which you have
led!  What might you not have done?  His soul was in your hands like
clay for the potter.  If you had raised him up, if you had led him on
the higher path, if you had brought out all that was noble and good
within him, how your name would have been loved and blessed, from the
chateau to the cottage!  But no; you dragged him down; you wasted his
youth; you drew him from his wife; you marred his manhood.  A crime in
one so high begets a thousand others in those who look to him for an
example; and all, all are upon your soul.  Take heed, madame, for God's
sake take heed ere it be too late!  For all your beauty, there can be
for you, as for me, a few short years of life.  Then, when that brown
hair is white, when that white cheek is sunken, when that bright eye is
dimmed--ah, then God pity the sin-stained soul of Francoise de
Montespan!"

Her rival had sunk her head for the moment before the solemn words and
the beautiful eyes.  For an instant she stood silent, cowed for the
first time in all her life; but then the mocking, defiant spirit came
back to her, and she glanced up with a curling lip.

"I am already provided with a spiritual director, thank you," said she.
"Oh, madame, you must not think to throw dust in my eyes!  I know you,
and know you well!"

"On the contrary, you seem to know less than I had expected.  If you
know me so well, pray what am I?"

All her rival's bitterness and hatred rang in the tones of her answer.
"You are," said she, "the governess of my children, and the secret
mistress of the king."

"You are mistaken," answered Madame de Maintenon  serenely.  "I am the
governess of your children, and I am the king's wife."



CHAPTER XXI.


THE MAN IN THE CALECHE.

Often had De Montespan feigned a faint in the days when she wished to
disarm the anger of the king.  So she had drawn his arms round her, and
won the pity which is the twin sister of love.  But now she knew what it
was to have the senses struck out of her by a word.  She could not doubt
the truth of what she heard.  There was that in her rival's face, in her
steady eye, in her quiet voice, which carried absolute conviction with
it.  She stood stunned for an instant, panting, her outstretched hands
feeling at the air, her defiant eyes dulling and glazing.  Then, with a
short sharp cry, the wail of one who has fought hard and yet knows that
she can fight no more, her proud head drooped, and she fell forward
senseless at the feet of her rival.  Madame de Maintenon stooped and
raised her up in her strong white arms.  There was true grief and pity
in her eyes as she looked down at the snow-pale face which lay against
her bosom, all the bitterness and pride gone out of it, and nothing left
save the tear which sparkled under the dark lashes, and the petulant
droop of the lip, like that of a child which had wept itself to sleep.
She laid her on the ottoman and placed a silken cushion under her head.
Then she gathered together and put back into the open cupboard all the
jewels which were scattered about the carpet.  Having locked it, and
placed the key on the table where its owner's eye would readily fall
upon it, she struck a gong, which summoned the little black page.

"Your mistress is indisposed," said she.  "Go and bring her maids to
her."  And so, having done all that lay with her to do, she turned away
from the great silent room, where, amid the velvet and the gilding, her
beautiful rival lay like a crushed flower, helpless and hopeless.

Helpless enough, for what could she do? and hopeless too, for how could
fortune aid her?  The instant that her senses had come back to her she
had sent away her waiting women, and lay with clasped hands and a drawn
face planning out her own weary future.  She must go; that was certain.
Not merely because it was the king's order, but because only misery and
mockery remained for her now in the palace where she had reigned
supreme.  It was true that she had held her position against the queen
before, but all her hatred could not blind her to the fact that her
rival was a very different woman to poor meek little Maria Theresa.
No; her spirit was broken at last.  She must accept defeat, and she must
go.

She rose from the couch, feeling that she had aged ten years in an hour.
There was much to be done, and little time in which to do it.  She had
cast down her jewels when the king had spoken as though they would atone
for the loss of his love; but now that the love was gone there was no
reason why the jewels should be lost too.  If she had ceased to be the
most powerful, she might still be the richest woman in France.  There
was her pension, of course.  That would be a munificent one, for Louis
was always generous.  And then there was all the spoil which she had
collected during these long years--the jewels the pearls, the gold, the
vases, the pictures, the crucifixes, the watches, the trinkets--together
they represented many millions of livres.  With her own hands she packed
away the more precious and portable of them, while she arranged with her
brother for the safe-keeping of the others.  All day she was at work in
a mood of feverish energy, doing anything and everything which might
distract her thoughts from her own defeat and her rival's victory.
By evening all was ready, and she had arranged that her property should
be sent after her to Petit Bourg, to which castle she intended to
retire.

It wanted half an hour of the time fixed for her departure, when a young
cavalier, whose face was strange to her, was ushered into the room.

He came with a message from her brother.

"Monsieur de Vivonne regrets, madame, that the rumour of your departure
has got abroad among the court."

"What do I care for that, monsieur?" she retorted, with all her old
spirit.

"He says, madame, that the courtiers may assemble at the west gate to
see you go; that Madame de Neuilly will be there, and the Duchesse de
Chambord, and Mademoiselle de Rohan, and--"

The lady shrank with horror at the thought of such an ordeal.  To drive
away from the palace, where she had been more than queen, under the
scornful eyes and bitter gibes of so many personal enemies!  After all
the humiliations of the day, that would be the crowning cup of sorrow.
Her nerve was broken.  She could not face it.

"Tell my brother, monsieur, that I should be much obliged if he would
make fresh arrangements, by which my departure might be private."

"He bade me say that he had done so, madame."

"Ah! at what hour then?"

"Now.  As soon as possible."

"I am ready.  At the west gate then?"

"No; at the east.  The carriage waits."

"And where is my brother?"

"We are to pick him up at the park gate."

"And why that?"

"Because he is watched; and were he seen beside the carriage, all would
be known."

"Very good.  Then, monsieur, if you will take my cloak and this casket
we may start at once."

They made their way by a circuitous route through the less-used
corridors, she hurrying on like a guilty creature, a hood drawn over her
face, and her heart in a flutter at every stray footfall.  But fortune
stood her friend.  She met no one, and soon found herself at the eastern
postern gate.  A couple of phlegmatic Swiss guardsmen leaned upon their
muskets upon either side, and the lamp above shone upon the carriage
which awaited her.  The door was open, and a tall cavalier swathed in a
black cloak handed her into it.  He then took the seat opposite to her,
slammed the door, and the caleche rattled away down the main drive.

It had not surprised her that this man should join her inside the coach,
for it was usual to have a guard there, and he was doubtless taking the
place which her brother would afterwards occupy.  That was all natural
enough.  But when ten minutes passed by, and he had neither moved nor
spoken, she peered at him through the gloom with some curiosity.  In the
glance which she had of him, as he handed her in, she had seen that he
was dressed like a gentleman, and there was that in his bow and wave as
he did it which told her experienced senses that he was a man of courtly
manners.  But courtiers, as she had known them, were gallant and
garrulous, and this man was so very quiet and still.  Again she strained
her eyes through the gloom.  His hat was pulled down and his cloak was
still drawn across his mouth, but from out of the shadow she seemed to
get a glimpse of two eyes which peered at her even as she did at him.

At last the silence impressed her with a vague uneasiness.  It was time
to bring it to an end.

"Surely, monsieur, we have passed the park gate where we were to pick up
my brother."

Her companion neither answered nor moved.  She thought that perhaps the
rumble of the heavy caleche had drowned her voice.

"I say, monsieur," she repeated, leaning forwards, "that we have passed
the place where we were to meet Monsieur de Vivonne."

He took no notice.

"Monsieur," she cried, "I again remark that we have passed the gates."

There was no answer.

A thrill ran through her nerves.  Who or what could he be, this silent
man?  Then suddenly it struck her that he might be dumb.

"Perhaps monsieur is afflicted," she said.  "Perhaps monsieur cannot
speak.  If that be the cause of your silence, will you raise your hand,
and I shall understand."  He sat rigid and silent.

Then a sudden mad fear came upon her, shut up in the dark with this
dreadful voiceless thing.  She screamed in her terror, and strove to
pull down the window and open the door.  But a grip of steel closed
suddenly round her wrist and forced her back into her seat.  And yet the
man's body had not moved, and there was no sound save the lurching and
rasping of the carriage and the clatter of the flying horses.  They were
already out on the country roads far beyond Versailles.  It was darker
than before, heavy clouds had banked over the heavens, and the rumbling
of thunder was heard low down on the horizon.

The lady lay back panting upon the leather cushions of the carriage.
She was a brave woman, and yet this sudden strange horror coming upon
her at the moment when she was weakest had shaken her to the soul.
She crouched in the corner, staring across with eyes which were dilated
with terror at the figure on the other side.  If he would but say
something!  Any revelation, any menace, was better than this silence.
It was so dark now that she could hardly see his vague outline, and
every instant, as the storm gathered, it became still darker.  The wind
was blowing in little short angry puffs, and still there was that
far-off rattle and rumble.  Again the strain of the silence was
unbearable.  She must break it at any cost.

"Sir," said she, "there is some mistake here.  I do not know by what
right you prevent me from pulling down the window and giving my
directions to the coachman."

He said nothing.

"I repeat, sir, that there is some mistake.  This is the carriage of my
brother, Monsieur de Vivonne, and he is not a man who will allow his
sister to be treated uncourteously."

A few heavy drops of rain splashed against one window.  The clouds were
lower and denser.  She had quite lost sight of that motionless figure,
but it was all the more terrible to her now that it was unseen.
She screamed with sheer terror, but her scream availed no more than her
words.

"Sir," she cried, clutching forward with her hands and grasping his
sleeve, "you frighten me.  You terrify me.  I have never harmed you.
Why should you wish to hurt an unfortunate woman?  Oh, speak to me; for
God's sake, speak!"

Still the patter of rain upon the window, and no other sound save her
own sharp breathing.

"Perhaps you do not know who I am!" she continued, endeavouring to
assume her usual tone of command, and talking now to an absolute and
impenetrable darkness.  "You may learn when it is too late that you have
chosen the wrong person for this pleasantry.  I am the Marquise de
Montespan, and I am not one who forgets a slight.  If you know anything
of the court, you must know that my word has some weight with the king.
You may carry me away in this carriage, but I am not a person who can
disappear without speedy inquiry, and speedy vengeance if I have been
wronged.  If you would--Oh, Jesus! Have mercy!"

A livid flash of lightning had burst from the heart of the cloud, and,
for an instant, the whole country-side and the interior of the caleche
were as light as day.  The man's face was within a hand's breadth of her
own, his mouth wide open, his eyes mere shining slits, convulsed with
silent merriment.  Every detail flashed out clear in that vivid light--
his red quivering tongue, the lighter pink beneath it, the broad white
teeth, the short brown beard cut into a peak and bristling forward.

But it was not the sudden flash, it was not the laughing, cruel face,
which shot an ice-cold shudder through Francoise de Montespan.  It was
that, of all men upon earth, this was he whom she most dreaded, and whom
she had least thought to see.

"Maurice!" she screamed.  "Maurice! it is you!"

"Yes, little wifie, it is I.  We are restored to each other's arms, you
see, after this interval."

"Oh, Maurice, how you have frightened me!  How could you be so cruel?
Why would you not speak to me?"

"Because it was so sweet to sit in silence and to think that I really
had you to myself after all these years, with none to come between.
Ah, little wifie, I have often longed for this hour."

"I have wronged you, Maurice; I have wronged you!  Forgive me!"

"We do not forgive in our family, my darling Francoise.  Is it not like
old days to find ourselves driving together?  And in this carriage, too.
It is the very one which bore us back from the cathedral where you made
your vows so prettily.  I sat as I sit now, and you sat there, and I
took your hand like this, and I pressed it, and--"

"Oh, villain, you have twisted my wrist!  You have broken my arm!"

"Oh, surely not, my little wifie!  And then you remember that, as you
told me how truly you would love me, I leaned forward to your lips,
and--"

"Oh, help!  Brute, you have cut my mouth!  You have struck me with your
ring."

"Struck you!  Now who would have thought that spring day when we planned
out our future, that this also was in the future waiting for me and you?
And this! and this!"

He struck savagely at her face in the darkness.  She threw herself down,
her head pressed against the cushions.  With the strength and fury of a
maniac he showered his blows above her, thudding upon the leather or
crashing upon the woodwork, heedless of his own splintered hands.

"So I have silenced you," said he at last.  "I have stopped your words
with my kisses before now.  But the world goes on, Francoise, and times
change, and women grow false, and men grow stern."

"You may kill me if you will," she moaned.

"I will," he said simply.

Still the carriage flew along, jolting and staggering in the
deeply-rutted country roads.  The storm had passed, but the growl of the
thunder and the far-off glint of a lightning-flash were to be heard and
seen on the other side of the heavens.  The moon shone out with its
clear cold light, silvering the broad, hedgeless, poplar-fringed plains,
and shining through the window of the carriage upon the crouching figure
and her terrible companion.  He leaned back now, his arms folded upon
his chest, his eyes gloating upon the abject misery of the woman who had
wronged him.

"Where are you taking me?" she asked at last.

"To Portillac, my little wifie."

"And why there?  What would you do to me?"

"I would silence that little lying tongue forever.  It shall deceive no
more men."

"You would murder me?"

"If you call it that."

"You have a stone for a heart."

"My other was given to a woman."

"Oh, my sins are indeed punished."

"Rest assured that they will be."

"Can I do nothing to atone?"

"I will see that you atone."

"You have a sword by your side, Maurice.  Why do you not kill me, then,
if you are so bitter against me?  Why do you not pass it through my
heart?"

"Rest assured that I would have done so had I not an excellent reason."

"Why, then?"

"I will tell you.  At Portillac I have the right of the high justice,
the middle, and the low.  I am seigneur there, and can try, condemn, and
execute.  It is my lawful privilege.  This pitiful king will not even
know how to avenge you, for the right is mine, and he cannot gainsay it
without making an enemy of every seigneur in France."

He opened his mouth again and laughed at his own device, while she,
shivering in every limb, turned away from his cruel face and glowing
eyes, and buried her face in her hands.  Once more she prayed God to
forgive her for her poor sinful life.  So they whirled through the night
behind the clattering horses, the husband and the wife, saying nothing,
but with hatred and fear raging in their hearts, until a brazier fire
shone down upon them from the angle of a keep, and the shadow of the
huge pile loomed vaguely up in front of them in the darkness.  It was
the Castle of Portillac.



CHAPTER XXII.


THE SCAFFOLD OF PORTILLAC.

And thus it was that Amory de Catinat and Amos Green saw from their
dungeon window the midnight carriage which discharged its prisoner
before their eyes.  Hence, too, came that ominous planking and that
strange procession in the early morning.  And thus it also happened that
they found themselves looking down upon Francoise de Montespan as she
was led to her death, and that they heard that last piteous cry for aid
at the instant when the heavy hand of the ruffian with the axe fell upon
her shoulder, and she was forced down upon her knees beside the block.
She shrank screaming from the dreadful, red-stained, greasy billet of
wood, but the butcher heaved up his weapon, and the seigneur had taken a
step forward with hand outstretched to seize the long auburn hair and to
drag the dainty head down with it when suddenly he was struck motionless
with astonishment, and stood with his foot advanced and his hand still
out, his mouth half open, and his eyes fixed in front of him.

And, indeed, what he had seen was enough to fill any man with amazement.
Out of the small square window which faced him a man had suddenly shot
head-foremost, pitching on to his outstretched hands and then bounding
to his feet.  Within a foot of his heels came the head of a second one,
who fell more heavily than the first, and yet recovered himself as
quickly.  The one wore the blue coat with silver facings of the king's
guard; the second had the dark coat and clean-shaven face of a man of
peace; but each carried a short rusty iron bar in his hand.  Not a word
did either of them say, but the soldier took two quick steps forward and
struck at the headsman while he was still poising himself for a blow at
the victim.  There was a thud, with a crackle like a breaking egg, and
the bar flew into pieces.  The heads-man gave a dreadful cry, and
dropped his axe, clapped his two hands to his head, and running zigzag
across the scaffold, fell over, a dead man, into the courtyard beneath.

Quick as a flash De Catinat had caught up the axe, and faced De
Montespan with the heavy weapon slung over his shoulder and a challenge
in his eyes.

"Now!" said he.

The seigneur had for the instant been too astounded to speak.  Now he
understood at least that these strangers had come between him and his
prey.

"Seize these men!" he shrieked, turning to his followers.

"One moment!" cried De Catinat, with a voice and manner which commanded
attention.  "You see by my coat what I am.  I am the body-servant of the
king.  Who touches me touches him.  Have a care for yourselves.  It is a
dangerous game!"

"On, you cowards!" roared De Montespan.

But the men-at-arms hesitated, for the fear of the king was as a great
shadow which hung over all France.  De Catinat saw their indecision, and
he followed up his advantage.

"This woman," he cried, "is the king's own favourite, and if any harm
come to a lock of her hair, I tell you that there is not a living soul
within this portcullis who will not die a death of torture.  Fools, will
you gasp out your lives upon the rack, or writhe in boiling oil, at the
bidding of this madman?"

"Who are these men, Marceau?" cried the seigneur furiously.

"They are prisoners, your excellency."

"Prisoners!  Whose prisoners?"

"Yours, your excellency."

"Who ordered you to detain them?"

"You did.  The escort brought your signet-ring."

"I never saw the men.  There is devilry in this.  But they shall not
beard me in my own castle, nor stand between me and my own wife.
No, _par dieu!_ they shall not and live! You men, Marceau, Etienne,
Gilbert, Jean, Pierre, all you who have eaten my bread, on to them, I
say!"

He glanced round with furious eyes, but they fell only upon hung heads
and averted faces.  With a hideous curse he flashed out his sword and
rushed at his wife, who knelt half insensible beside the block.
De Catinat sprang between them to protect her; but Marceau, the bearded
seneschal, had already seized his master round the waist.  With the
strength of a maniac, his teeth clenched and the foam churning from the
corners of his lips, De Montespan writhed round in the man's grasp, and
shortening his sword, he thrust it through the brown beard and deep into
the throat behind it.  Marceau fell back with a choking cry, the blood
bubbling from his mouth and his wound; but before his murderer could
disengage his weapon, De Catinat and the American, aided by a dozen of
the retainers, had dragged him down on to the scaffold, and Amos Green
had pinioned him so securely that he could but move his eyes and his
lips, with which he lay glaring and spitting at them.  So savage were
his own followers against him--for Marceau was well loved amongst them--
that, with axe and block so ready, justice might very swiftly have had
her way, had not a long clear bugle-call, rising and falling in a
thousand little twirls and flourishes, clanged out suddenly in the still
morning air.  De Catinat pricked up his ears at the sound of it like a
hound at the huntsman's call.

"Did you hear, Amos?"

"It was a trumpet."

"It was the guards' bugle-call.  You, there, hasten to the gate!
Throw up the portcullis and drop the drawbridge!  Stir yourselves, or
even now you may suffer for your master's sins!  It has been a narrow
escape, Amos!"

"You may say so, friend.  I saw him put out his hand to her hair, even
as you sprang from the window.  Another instant and he would have had
her scalped.  But she is a fair woman, the fairest that ever my eyes
rested upon, and it is not fit that she should kneel here upon these
boards."  He dragged her husband's long black cloak from him, and made a
pillow for the senseless woman with a tenderness and delicacy which came
strangely from a man of his build and bearing.

He was still stooping over her when there came the clang of the falling
bridge, and an instant later the clatter of the hoofs of a troop of
cavalry, who swept with wave of plumes, toss of manes, and jingle of
steel into the courtyard.  At the head was a tall horseman in the full
dress of the guards, with a curling feather in his hat, high buff
gloves, and his sword gleaming in the sunlight.  He cantered forward
towards the scaffold, his keen dark eyes taking in every detail of the
group which awaited him there.  De Catinat's face brightened at the
sight of him, and he was down in an instant beside his stirrup.

"De Brissac!"

"De Catinat!  Now where in the name of wonder did you come from?"

"I have been a prisoner.  Tell me, De Brissac, did you leave the message
in Paris?"

"Certainly I did."

"And the archbishop came?"

"He did."

"And the marriage?"

"Took place as arranged.  That is why this poor woman whom I see yonder
has had to leave the palace."

"I thought as much."

"I trust that no harm has come to her?"

"My friend and I were just in time to save her.  Her husband lies there.
He is a fiend, De Brissac."

"Very likely; but an angel might have grown bitter had he had the same
treatment."

"We have him pinioned here.  He has slain a man, and I have slain
another."

"On my word, you have been busy."

"How did you know that we were here?"

"Nay, that is an unexpected pleasure."

"You did not come for us, then?"

"No; we came for the lady."

"And how did this fellow get hold of her?"

"Her brother was to have taken her in his carriage.  Her husband learned
it, and by a lying message he coaxed her into his own, which was at
another door.  When De Vivonne found that she did not come, and that her
rooms were empty, he made inquiries, and soon learned how she had gone.
De Montespan's arms had been seen on the panel, and so the king sent me
here with my troop as fast as we could gallop."

"Ah, and you would have come too late had a strange chance not brought
us here.  I know not who it was who waylaid us, for this man seemed to
know nothing of the matter.  However, all that will be clearer
afterwards.  What is to be done now?"

"I have my own orders.  Madame is to be sent to Petit Bourg, and any who
are concerned in offering her violence are to be kept until the king's
pleasure is known.  The castle, too, must be held for the king.
But you, De Catinat, you have nothing to do now?"

"Nothing, save that I would like well to ride into Paris to see that all
is right with my uncle and his daughter."

"Ah, that sweet little cousin of thine!  By my soul, I do not wonder
that the folk know you well in the Rue St. Martin.  Well, I have carried
a message for you once, and you shall do as much for me now."

"With all my heart.  And whither?"

"To Versailles.  The king will be on fire to know how we have fared.
You have the best right to tell him, since without you and your friend
yonder it would have been but a sorry tale."

"I will be there in two hours."

"Have you horses?"

"Ours were slain."

"You will find some in the stables here.  Pick the best, since you have
lost your own in the king's service."

The advice was too good to be overlooked.  De Catinat, beckoning to Amos
Green, hurried away with him to the stables, while De Brissac, with a
few short sharp orders, disarmed the retainers, stationed his guardsmen
all over the castle, and arranged for the removal of the lady, and for
the custody of her husband.  An hour later the two friends were riding
swiftly down the country road, inhaling the sweet air, which seemed the
fresher for their late experience of the dank, foul vapours of their
dungeon.  Far behind them a little dark pinnacle jutting over a grove of
trees marked the chateau which they had left, while on the extreme
horizon to the west there came a quick shimmer and sparkle where the
level rays of the early sun gleamed upon the magnificent palace which
was their goal.





CHAPTER XXIII.


THE FALL OF THE CATINATS.

Two days after Madame de Maintenon's marriage to the king there was held
within the humble walls of her little room a meeting which was destined
to cause untold misery to many hundreds of thousands of people, and yet,
in the wisdom of Providence, to be an instrument in carrying French arts
and French ingenuity and French sprightliness among those heavier
Teutonic peoples who have been the stronger and the better ever since
for the leaven which they then received.  For in history great evils
have sometimes arisen from a virtue, and most beneficent results have
often followed hard upon a crime.

The time had come when the Church was to claim her promise from madame,
and her pale cheek and sad eyes showed how vain it had been for her to
try and drown the pleadings of her tender heart by the arguments of the
bigots around her.  She knew the Huguenots of France.  Who could know
them better, seeing that she was herself from their stock, and had been
brought up in their faith?  She knew their patience, their nobility,
their independence, their tenacity.  What chance was there that they
would conform to the king's wish?  A few great nobles might, but the
others would laugh at the galleys, the jail, or even the gallows when
the faith of their fathers was at stake.  If their creed were no longer
tolerated, then, and if they remained true to it, they must either fly
from the country or spend a living death tugging at an oar or working in
a chain-gang upon the roads.  It was a dreadful alternative to present
to a people who were so numerous that they made a small nation in
themselves.  And most dreadful of all, that she who was of their own
blood should cast her voice against them.  And yet her promise had been
given, and now the time had come when it must be redeemed.

The eloquent Bishop Bossuet was there, with Louvois, the minister of
war, and the famous Jesuit, Father la Chaise, each piling argument upon
argument to overcome the reluctance of the king.  Beside them stood
another priest, so thin and so pale that he might have risen from his
bed of death, but with a fierce light burning in his large dark eyes,
and with a terrible resolution in his drawn brows and in the set of his
grim, lanky jaw.  Madame bent over her tapestry and weaved her coloured
silks in silence, while the king leaned upon his hand and listened with
the face of a man who knows that he is driven, and yet can hardly turn
against the goads.  On the low table lay a paper, with pen and ink
beside it.  It was the order for the revocation, and it only needed the
king's signature to make it the law of the land.

"And so, father, you are of opinion that if I stamp out heresy in this
fashion I shall assure my own salvation in the next world?" he asked.

"You will have merited a reward."

"And you think so too, Monsieur Bishop?"

"Assuredly, sire."

"And you.  Abbe du Chayla?"

The emaciated priest spoke for the first time, a tinge of colour
creeping into his corpse-like cheeks, and a more lurid light in his
deep-set eyes.

"I know not about assuring your salvation, sire.  I think it would take
very much more to do that.  But there cannot be a doubt as to your
damnation if you do not do it."

The king started angrily, and frowned at the speaker.

"Your words are somewhat more curt than I am accustomed to," he
remarked.

"In such a matter it were cruel indeed to leave you in doubt.  I say
again that your soul's fate hangs upon the balance.  Heresy is a mortal
sin.  Thousands of heretics would turn to the Church if you did but give
the word.  Therefore these thousands of mortal sins are all upon your
soul.  What hope for it then, if you do not amend?"

"My father and my grandfather tolerated them."

"Then, without some special extension of the grace  of God, your father
and your grandfather are burning  in hell."

"Insolent!" The king sprang from his seat.

"Sire, I will say what I hold to be the truth were you fifty times a
king.  What care I for any man when I know that I speak for the King of
kings?  See; are these the limbs of one who would shrink from testifying
to truth?"  With a sudden movement he threw back the long sleeves of his
gown and shot out his white fleshless arms.  The bones were all knotted
and bent and screwed into the most fantastic shapes.  Even Louvois, the
hardened man of the court, and his two brother priests, shuddered at the
sight of those dreadful limbs.  He raised them above his head and turned
his burning eyes upwards.

"Heaven has chosen me to testify for the faith before now," said he.
"I heard that blood was wanted to nourish the young Church of Siam, and
so to Siam I journeyed.  They tore me open; they crucified me; they
wrenched and split my bones.  I was left as a dead man, yet God has
breathed the breath of life back into me that I may help in this great
work of the regeneration of France."

"Your sufferings, father," said Louis, resuming his seat, "give you
every claim, both upon the Church and upon me, who am its special
champion and protector.  What would you counsel, then, father, in the
case of those Huguenots who refuse to change?"

"They would change," cried Du Chayla, with a drawn smile upon his
ghastly face.  "They must bend or they must break.  What matter if they
be ground to powder, if we can but build up a complete Church in the
land?"  His deep-set eyes glowed with ferocity, and be shook one bony
hand in savage wrath above his head.

"The cruelty with which you have been used, then, has not taught you to
be more tender to others."

"Tender!  To heretics!  No, sire, my own pains have taught me that the
world and the flesh are as nothing, and that the truest charity to
another is to capture his soul at all risks to his vile body.  I should
have these Huguenot souls, sire, though I turned France into a shambles
to gain them."

Louis was evidently deeply impressed by the fearless words and the wild
earnestness of the speaker.  He leaned his head upon his hand for a
little time, and remained sunk in the deepest thought.

"Besides, sire," said Pere la Chaise softly, "there would be little need
for these stronger measures of which the good abbe speaks.  As I have
already remarked to you, you are so beloved in your kingdom that the
mere assurance that you had expressed your will upon the subject would
be enough to turn them all to the true faith."

"I wish that I could think so, father; I wish that I could think so.
But what is this?"

It was his valet who had half opened the door.

"Captain de Catinat is here, who desires to see you at once, sire."

"Ask the captain to enter.  Ah!"  A happy thought seemed to have struck
him.  "We shall see what love for me will do in such a matter, for if it
is anywhere to be found it must be among my own body-servants."

The guardsman had arrived that instant from his long ride, and leaving
Amos Green with the horses, he had come on at once, all dusty and
travel-stained, to carry his message to the king.  He entered now, and
stood with the quiet ease of a man who is used to such scenes, his hand
raised in a salute.

"What news, captain?"

"Major de Brissac bade me tell you, sire, that he held the Castle of
Portillac, that the lady is safe, and that her husband is a prisoner."

Louis and his wife exchanged a quick glance of relief.

"That is well," said he.  "By the way, captain, you have served me in
many ways of late, and always with success.  I hear, Louvois, that De la
Salle is dead of the small-pox."

"He died yesterday, sire."

"Then I desire that you make out the vacant commission of major to
Monsieur de Catinat.  Let me be the first to congratulate you, major,
upon your promotion, though you will need to exchange the blue coat for
the pearl and gray of the mousquetaires.  We cannot spare you from the
household, you see."

De Catinat kissed the hand which the monarch held out to him.

"May I be worthy of your kindness, sire!"

"You would do what you could to serve me, would you not?"

"My life is yours, sire."

"Very good.  Then I shall put your fidelity to the proof."

"I am ready for any proof."

"It is not a very severe one.  You see this paper upon the table.  It is
an order that all the Huguenots in my dominions shall give up their
errors, under pain of banishment or captivity.  Now I have hopes that
there are many of my faithful subjects who are at fault in this matter,
but who will abjure it when they learn that it is my clearly expressed
wish that they should do so.  It would be a great joy to me to find that
it was so, for it would be a pain to me to use force against any man who
bears the name of Frenchman.  Do you follow me?"

"Yes, sire." The young man had turned deadly pale, and he shifted his
feet, and opened and clasped his hands.  He had faced death a dozen
times and under many different forms, but never had he felt such a
sinking of the heart as came over him now.

"You are yourself a Huguenot, I understand.  I would gladly have you,
then, as the first-fruit of this great measure.  Let us hear from your
own lips that you, for one, are ready to follow the lead of your king in
this as in other things."

The young guardsman still hesitated, though his doubts were rather as to
how he should frame his reply than as to what its substance should be.
He felt that in an instant Fortune had wiped out all the good turns
which she had done him during his past life, and that now, far from
being in her debt, he held a heavy score against her.  The king arched
his eyebrows and drummed his fingers impatiently as he glanced at the
downcast face and dejected bearing.

"Why all this thought?" he cried.  "You are a man whom I have raised and
whom I will raise.  He who has a major's epaulettes at thirty may carry
a marshal's baton at fifty.  Your past is mine, and your future shall be
no less so.  What other hopes have  you?"

"I have none, sire, outside your service."

"Why this silence, then? Why do you not give the assurance which I
demand?"

"I cannot do it, sire."

"You cannot do it!"

"It is impossible.  I should have no more peace in my mind, or respect
for myself, if I knew that for the sake of position or wealth I had
given up the faith of my fathers."

"Man, you are surely mad!  There is all that a man could covet upon one
side, and what is there upon the other?"

"There is my honour."

"And is it, then, a dishonour to embrace my religion?"

"It would be a dishonour to me to embrace it for the sake of gain
without believing in it."

"Then believe it."

"Alas, sire, a man cannot force himself to believe.  Belief is a thing
which must come to him, not he to it."

"On my word, father," said Louis, glancing with a bitter smile at his
Jesuit confessor, "I shall have to pick the cadets of the household from
your seminary, since my officers have turned casuists and theologians.
So, for the last time, you refuse to obey my request?"

"Oh, sire--" De Catinat took a step forward with outstretched hands and
tears in his eyes.

But the king checked him with a gesture.  "I desire no protestations,"
said he.  "I judge a man by his acts.  Do you abjure or not?"

"I cannot, sire."

"You see," said Louis, turning again to the Jesuit, "it will not be as
easy as you think."

"This man is obstinate, it is true, but many others will be more
yielding."

The king shook his head.  "I would that I knew what to do," said he.
"Madame, I know that you, at least, will ever give me the best advice.
You have heard all that has been said.  What do you recommend?"

She kept her eyes still fixed upon her tapestry, but her voice was firm
and clear as she answered:--

"You have yourself said that you are the eldest son of the Church.
If the eldest son desert her, then who will do her bidding?  And there
is truth, too, in what the holy abbe has said.  You may imperil your own
soul by condoning this sin of heresy.  It grows and flourishes, and if
it be not rooted out now, it may choke the truth as weeds and briers
choke the wheat."

"There are districts in France now," said Bossuet, "where a church is
not to be seen in a day's journey, and where all the folk, from the
nobles to the peasants, are of the same accursed faith.  So it is in the
Cevennes, where the people are as fierce and rugged as their own
mountains.  Heaven guard the priests who have to bring them back from
their errors."

"Whom should I send on so perilous a task?" asked Louis.

The Abbe du Chayla was down in a instant upon his knees with his gaunt
hands outstretched.  "Send me, sire! Me!" he cried.  "I have never asked
a favour of you, and never will again.  But I am the man who could
break this people.  Send me with your message to the people of the
Cevennes."

"God help the people of the Cevennes!" muttered Louis, as he looked with
mingled respect and loathing at the emaciated face and fiery eyes of the
fanatic.  "Very well, abbe," he added aloud; "you shall go to the
Cevennes."

Perhaps for an instant there came upon the stern priest some premonition
of that dreadful morning when, as he crouched in a corner of 'his
burning home, fifty daggers were to rasp against each other in his body.
He sunk his face in his hands, and a shudder passed over his gaunt
frame.  Then he rose, and folding his arms, he resumed his impassive
attitude.  Louis took up the pen from the table, and drew the paper
towards him.

"I have the same counsel, then, from all of you," said he,--"from you,
bishop; from you, father; from you, madame; from you, abbe; and from
you, Louvois.  Well, if ill come from it, may it not be visited upon me!
But what is this?"

De Catinat had taken a step forward with his hand outstretched.
His ardent, impetuous nature had suddenly broken down all the barriers
of caution, and he seemed for the instant to see that countless throng
of men, women, and children of his own faith, all unable to say a word
for themselves, and all looking to him as their champion and spokesman.
He had thought little of such matters when all was well, but now, when
danger threatened, the deeper side of his nature was moved, and he felt
how light a thing is life and fortune when weighed against a great
abiding cause and principle.

"Do not sign it, sire," he cried.  "You will live to wish that your hand
had withered ere it grasped that pen.  I know it, sire.  I am sure of
it.  Consider all these helpless folk--the little children, the young
girls, the old and the feeble.  Their creed is themselves.  As well ask
the leaves to change the twigs on which they grow.  They could not
change.  At most you could but hope to turn them from honest folk into
hypocrites.  And why should you do it?  They honour you.  They love you.
They harm none.  They are proud to serve in your armies, to fight for
you, to work for you, to build up the greatness of your kingdom.
I implore you, sire, to think again before you sign an order which will
bring misery and desolation to so many."

For a moment the king had hesitated as he listened to the short abrupt
sentences in which the soldier pleaded for his fellows, but his face
hardened again as he remembered how even his own personal entreaty had
been unable to prevail with this young dandy of the court.

"France's religion should be that of France's king," said he, "and if my
own guardsmen thwart me in such a matter, I must find others who will be
more faithful.  That major's commission in the mousquetaires must go to
Captain de Belmont, Louvois."

"Very good, sire."

"And De Catinat's commission may be transferred to Lieutenant
Labadoyere."

"Very good, sire."

"And I am to serve you no longer?"

"You are too dainty for my service."

De Catinat's arms fell listlessly to his side, and his head sunk forward
upon his breast.  Then, as he realised the ruin of all the hopes of his
life, and the cruel injustice with which he had been treated, he broke
into a cry of despair, and rushed from the room with the hot tears of
impotent anger running down his face.  So, sobbing, gesticulating, with
coat unbuttoned and hat awry, he burst into the stable where placid Amos
Green was smoking his pipe and watching with critical eyes the grooming
of the horses.

"What in thunder is the matter now?" he asked, holding his pipe by the
bowl, while the blue wreaths curled up from his lips.

"This sword," cried the Frenchman--"I have no right to wear it!  I shall
break it!"

"Well, and I'll break my knife too if it will hearten you up."

"And these," cried De Catinat, tugging at his silver shoulder-straps,
"they must go."

"Ah, you draw ahead of me there, for I never had any.  But come, friend,
let me know the trouble, that I may see if it may not be mended."

"To Paris! to Paris!" shouted the guardsman frantically.  "If I am
ruined, I may yet be in time to save them.  The horses, quick!"

It was clear to the American that some sudden calamity had befallen, so
he aided his comrade and the grooms to saddle and bridle.

Five minutes later they were flying on their way, and in little more
than an hour their steeds, all reeking and foam-flecked, were pulled up
outside the high house in the Rue St. Martin.  De Catinat sprang from
his saddle and rushed upstairs, while Amos followed in his own leisurely
fashion.

The old Huguenot and his beautiful daughter were seated at one side of
the great fireplace, her hand in his, and they sprang up together, she
to throw herself with a glad cry into the arms of her lover, and he to
grasp the hand which his nephew held out to him.

At the other side of the fireplace, with a very long pipe in his mouth
and a cup of wine upon a settle beside him, sat a strange-looking man,
with grizzled hair and beard, a fleshy red projecting nose, and two
little gray eyes, which twinkled out from under huge brindled brows.
His long thin face was laced and seamed with wrinkles, crossing and
recrossing everywhere, but fanning out in hundreds from the corners of
his eyes.  It was set in an unchanging expression, and as it was of the
same colour all over, as dark as the darkest walnut, it might have been
some quaint figure-head cut out of a coarse-grained  wood.  He was clad
in a blue serge jacket, a pair of red breeches smeared at the knees with
tar, clean gray worsted stockings, large steel buckles over his coarse
square-toed shoes, and beside him, balanced upon the top of a thick
oaken cudgel, was a weather-stained silver-laced hat.  His gray-shot
hair was gathered up behind into a short stiff tail, and a seaman's
hanger, with a brass handle, was girded to his waist by a tarnished
leather belt.

De Catinat had been too occupied to take notice of this singular
individual, but Amos Green gave a shout of delight at the sight of him,
and ran forward to greet him.  The other's wooden face relaxed so far as
to show two tobacco-stained fangs, and, without rising, he held out a
great red hand, of the size and shape of a moderate spade.

"Why, Captain Ephraim," cried Amos in English, "who ever would have
thought of finding you here?  De Catinat, this is my old friend Ephraim
Savage, under whose charge I came here."

"Anchor's apeak, lad, and the hatches down," said the stranger, in the
peculiar drawling voice which the New Englanders had retained from their
ancestors, the English Puritans.

"And when do you sail?"

"As soon as your foot is on her deck, if Providence serve us with wind
and tide.  And how has all gone with thee, Amos?"

"Right well.  I have much to tell you of."

"I trust that you have held yourself apart from all their popish
devilry."

"Yes, yes, Ephraim."

"And have had no truck with the scarlet woman."

"No, no; but what is it now?"

The grizzled hair was bristling with rage, and the little gray eyes were
gleaming from under the heavy tufts.  Amos, following their gaze, saw
that De Catinat was seated with his arm round Adele, while her head
rested upon his shoulder.

"Ah, if I but knew their snip-snap, lippetty-chippetty lingo!  Saw one
ever such a sight! Amos, lad, what is the French for 'a shameless
hussy'?"

"Nay, nay, Ephraim.  Surely one may see such a sight, and think no harm
of it, on our side of the water.

"Never, Amos.  In no godly country."

"Tut! I have seen folks courting in New York."

"Ah, New York! I said in no godly country.  I cannot answer for New York
or Virginia.  South of Cape Cod, or of New Haven at the furthest, there
is no saying what folk will do.  Very sure I am that in Boston or Salem
or Plymouth she would see the bridewell and he the stocks for half as
much.  Ah!" He shook his head and bent his brows at the guilty couple.

But they and their old relative were far too engrossed with their own
affairs to give a thought to the Puritan seaman.  De Catinat had told
his tale in a few short, bitter sentences, the injustice that had been
done to him, his dismissal from the king's service, and the ruin which
had come upon the Huguenots of France.  Adele, as is the angel instinct
of woman, thought only of her lover and his misfortunes as she listened
to his story, but the old merchant tottered to his feet when he heard of
the revocation of the Edict, and stood with shaking limbs, staring about
him in bewilderment.

"What am I to do?" he cried.  "What am I to do?  I am too old to begin
my life again."

"Never fear, uncle," said De Catinat heartily.  "There are other lands
beyond France."

"But not for me.  No, no; I am too old.  Lord, but Thy hand is heavy
upon Thy servants.  Now is the vial opened, and the carved work of the
sanctuary thrown down.  Ah, what shall I do, and whither shall I turn?"
He wrung his hands in his perplexity.

"What is amiss with him, then, Amos?" asked the seaman.  "Though I know
nothing of what he says, yet I can see that he flies a distress signal."

"He and his must leave the country, Ephraim."

"And why?"

"Because they are Protestants, and the king will not abide their creed."

Ephraim Savage was across the room in an instant, and had enclosed the
old merchant's thin hand in his own great knotted fist.  There was a
brotherly sympathy in his strong grip and rugged weather-stained face
which held up the other's courage as no words could have done.

"What is the French for 'the scarlet woman,' Amos?" he asked, glancing
over his shoulder.  "Tell this man that we shall see him through.
Tell him that we've got a country where he'll just fit in like a bung in
a barrel.  Tell him that religion is free to all there, and not a papist
nearer than Baltimore or the Capuchins of the Penobscot.  Tell him that
if he wants to come, the _Golden Rod_ is waiting with her anchor apeak
and her cargo aboard.  Tell him what you like, so long as you make him
come."

"Then we must come at once," said De Catinat, as he listened to the
cordial message which was conveyed to his uncle.  "To-night the orders
will be out, and to-morrow it may be too late."

"But my business!" cried the merchant.

"Take what valuables you can, and leave the rest.  Better that than lose
all, and liberty into the bargain."

And so at last it was arranged.  That very night, within five minutes of
the closing of the gates, there passed out of Paris a small party of
five, three upon horseback, and two in a closed carriage which bore
several weighty boxes upon the top.  They were the first leaves flying
before the hurricane, the earliest of that great multitude who were
within the next few months to stream along every road which led from
France, finding their journey's end too often in galley, dungeon and
torture chamber, and yet flooding over the frontiers in numbers
sufficient to change the industries and modify the characters of all the
neighbouring peoples.  Like the Israelites of old, they had been driven
from their homes at the bidding of an angry king, who, even while he
exiled them, threw every difficulty in the way of their departure.  Like
them, too, there were none of them who could hope to reach their
promised land without grievous wanderings, penniless, friendless, and
destitute.  What passages befell these pilgrims in their travels, what
dangers they met, and overcame in the land of the Swiss, on the Rhine,
among the Walloons, in England, in Ireland, in Berlin, and even in
far-off Russia, has still to be written.  This one little group,
however, whom we know, we may follow in their venturesome journey, and
see the chances which befell them upon that great continent which had
lain fallow for so long, sown only with the weeds of humanity, but which
was now at last about to quicken into such glorious life.



PART II.


IN THE NEW WORLD.




CHAPTER XXIV.


THE START OF THE "GOLDEN ROD."

Thanks to the early tidings which the guardsman had brought with him,
his little party was now ahead of the news.  As they passed through the
village of Louvier in the early morning they caught a glimpse of a naked
corpse upon a dunghill, and were told by a grinning watchman that it was
that of a Huguenot who had died impenitent, but that was a common enough
occurrence already, and did not mean that there had been any change in
the law.  At Rouen all was quiet, and Captain Ephraim Savage before
evening had brought both them and such property as they had saved aboard
of his brigantine, the Golden Rod.  It was but a little craft, some
seventy tons burden, but at a time when so many were putting out to sea
in open boats, preferring the wrath of Nature to that of the king, it
was a refuge indeed.  The same night the seaman drew up his anchor and
began to slowly make his way down the winding river.

And very slow work it was.  There was half a moon shining and a breeze
from the east, but the stream writhed and twisted and turned until
sometimes they seemed to be sailing up rather than down.  In the long
reaches they set the yard square and ran, but often they had to lower
their two boats and warp her painfully along, Tomlinson of Salem, the
mate, and six grave, tobacco-chewing, New England seamen with their
broad palmetto hats, tugging and straining at the oars.  Amos Green, De
Catinat, and even the old merchant had to take their spell ere morning,
when the sailors were needed aboard for the handling of the canvas.
At last, however, with the early dawn the river broadened out and each
bank trended away, leaving a long funnel-shaped estuary between.
Ephraim Savage snuffed the air and paced the deck briskly with a twinkle
in his keen gray eyes.  The wind had fallen away, but there was still
enough to drive them slowly upon their course.

"Where's the gal?" he asked.

"She is in my cabin," said Amos Green.  "I thought that maybe she could
manage there until we got across."

"Where will you sleep yourself, then?"

"Tut, a litter of spruce boughs and a sheet of birch bark over me have
been enough all these years.  What would I ask better than this deck of
soft white pine and my blanket?"

"Very good.  The old man and his nephew, him with the blue coat, can
have the two empty bunks.  But you must speak to that man, Amos.  I'll
have no philandering aboard my ship, lad--no whispering or cuddling or
any such foolishness.  Tell him that this ship is just a bit broke off
from Boston, and he'll have to put up with Boston ways until he gets off
her.  They've been good enough for better men than him.  You give me the
French for 'no philandering,' and I'll bring him up with a round turn
when he drifts."

"It's a pity we left so quick or they might have been married before we
started.  She's a good girl, Ephraim, and he is a fine man, for all that
their ways are not the same as ours.  They don't seem to take life so
hard as we, and maybe they get more pleasure out of it."

"I never heard tell that we were put here to get pleasure out of it,"
said the old Puritan, shaking his head.  "The valley of the shadow of
death don't seem to me to be the kind o' name one would give to a
play-ground.  It is a trial and a chastening, that's what it is, the
gall of bitterness and the bond of iniquity.  We're bad from the
beginning, like a stream that runs from a tamarack swamp, and we've
enough to do to get ourselves to rights without any fool's talk about
pleasure."

"It seems to me to be all mixed up," said Amos.  "like the fat and the
lean in a bag of pemmican.  Look at that sun just pushing its edge over
the trees, and see the pink flush on the clouds and the river like a
rosy ribbon behind us.  It's mighty pretty to our eyes, and very
pleasing to us, and it wouldn't be so to my mind if the Creator hadn't
wanted it to be.  Many a time when I have lain in the woods in the fall
and smoked my pipe, and felt how good the tobacco was, and how bright
the yellow maples were, and the purple ash, and the red tupelo blazing
among the bushwood, I've felt that the real fool's talk was with the man
who could doubt that all this was meant to make the world happier for
us."

"You've been thinking too much in them woods," said Ephraim Savage,
gazing at him uneasily.  "Don't let your sail be too great for your
boat, lad, nor trust to your own wisdom.  Your father was from the Bay,
and you were raised from a stock that cast the dust of England from
their feet rather than bow down to Baal.  Keep a grip on the word and
don't think beyond it.  But what is the matter with the old man?
He don't  seem easy in his mind."

The old merchant had been leaning over the bulwarks, looking back with a
drawn face and weary eyes at the red curving track behind them which
marked the path to Paris.  Adele had come up now, with not a thought to
spare upon the dangers and troubles which lay in front of her as she
chafed the old man's thin cold hands, and whispered words of love and
comfort into his ears.  But they had come to the point where the gentle
still-flowing river began for the first time to throb to the beat of the
sea.  The old man gazed forward with horror at the bowsprit as he saw it
rise slowly upwards into the air, and clung frantically at the rail as
it seemed to slip away from beneath him.

"We are always in the hollow of God's hand," he whispered, "but oh,
Adele, it is a dreadful thing to feel His fingers moving under us."

"Come with me, uncle," said De Catinat, passing his arm under that of
the old man.  "It is long since you have rested.  And you, Adele, I pray
that you will go and sleep, my poor darling, for it has been a weary
journey.  Go now, to please me, and when you wake, both France and your
troubles will lie behind you."

When father and daughter had left the deck, De Catinat made his way aft
again to where Amos Green and the captain were standing.

"I am glad to get them below, Amos," said he, "for I fear that we may
have trouble yet."

"And how?"

"You see the white road which runs by the southern bank of the river.
Twice within the last half-hour I have seen horsemen spurring for dear
life along it.  Where the spires and smoke are yonder is Honfleur, and
thither it was that these men went.  I know not who could ride so madly
at such an hour unless they were the messengers of the king.  Oh, see,
there is a third one!"

On the white band which wound among the green meadows a black dot could
be seen which moved along with great rapidity, vanished behind a clump
of trees, and then reappeared again, making for the distant city.
Captain Savage drew out his glass and gazed at the rider.

"Ay, ay," said he, as he snapped it up again.  "It is a soldier, sure
enough.  I can see the glint of the scabbard which he carries on his
larboard side.  I think we shall have more wind soon.  With a breeze we
can show our heels to anything in French waters, but a galley or an
armed boat would overhaul us now."

De Catinat, who, though he could speak little English, had learned in
America to understand it pretty well, looked anxiously at Amos Green.
"I fear that we shall bring trouble on this good captain," said he,
"and that the loss of his cargo and ship may be his reward for having
befriended us.  Ask him whether he would not prefer to land us on the
north bank.  With our money we might make our way into the Lowlands."

Ephraim Savage looked at his passenger with eyes which had lost
something of their sternness.  "Young man," said he, "I see that you can
understand something of my talk."

De Catinat nodded.

"I tell you then that I am a bad man to beat.  Any man that was ever
shipmates with me would tell you as much.  I just jam my helm and keep
my course as long as God will let me.  D'ye see?"

De Catinat again nodded, though in truth the seaman's metaphors left him
with but a very general sense of his meaning.

"We're comin' abreast of that there town, and in ten minutes we shall
know if there is any trouble waiting for us.  But I'll tell you a story
as we go that'll show you what kind o' man you've shipped with.  It was
ten years ago that I speak of, when I was in the _Speedwell_, sixty-ton
brig, tradin' betwixt Boston and Jamestown, goin' south with lumber and
skins and fixin's, d'ye see, and north again with tobacco and molasses.
One night, blowin' half a gale from the south'ard, we ran on a reef two
miles to the east of Cape May, and down we went with a hole in our
bottom like as if she'd been spitted on the steeple o' one o' them
Honfleur churches.  Well, in the morning there I was washin' about, nigh
out of sight of land, clingin' on to half the foreyard, without a sign
either of my mates or of wreckage.  I wasn't so cold, for it was early
fall, and I could get three parts of my body on to the spar, but I was
hungry and thirsty and bruised, so I just took in two holes of my
waist-belt, and put up a hymn, and had a look round for what I could
see.  Well, I saw more than I cared for.  Within five paces of me there
was a great fish, as long pretty nigh as the spar that I was grippin'.
It's a mighty pleasant thing to have your legs in the water and a beast
like that all ready for a nibble at your toes."

"_Mon Dieu!_" cried the French soldier.  "And he have not eat you?"

Ephraim Savage's little eyes twinkled at the reminiscence.

"I ate him," said he.

"What!" cried Amos.

"It's a mortal fact.  I'd a jack-knife in my pocket, Same as this one,
and I kicked my legs to keep the brute off, and I whittled away at the
spar until I'd got a good jagged bit off, sharp at each end, same as a
nigger told me once down Delaware way.  Then I waited for him, and
stopped kicking, so he came at me like a hawk on a chick-a-dee.  When he
turned up his belly I jammed my left hand with the wood right into his
great grinnin' mouth, and I let him have it with my knife between the
gills.  He tried to break away then, but I held on, d'ye see, though he
took me so deep I thought I'd never come up again.  I was nigh gone when
we got to the surface, but he was floatin' with the white up, and twenty
holes in his shirt front.  Then I got back to my spar, for we'd gone a
long fifty fathoms under water, and when I reached it I fainted dead
away."

"And then?"

"Well, when I came to, it was calm, and there was the dead shark
floatin' beside me.  I paddled my spar over to him and I got loose a few
yards of halliard that were hangin' from one end of it.  I made a
clove-hitch round his tail, d'ye see, and got the end of it slung over
the spar and fastened, so as I couldn't lose him.  Then I set to work
and I ate him in a week right up to his back fin, and I drank the rain
that fell on my coat, and when I was picked up by the _Gracie_ of
Gloucester, I was that fat that I could scarce climb aboard.
That's what Ephraim Savage means, my lad, when he says that he is a
baddish man to beat."

Whilst the Puritan seaman had been detailing his reminiscence, his eyes
had kept wandering from the clouds to the flapping sails and back.
Such wind as there was came in little short puffs, and the canvas either
drew full or was absolutely slack.  The fleecy shreds of cloud above,
however, travelled swiftly across the blue sky.  It was on these that
the captain fixed his gaze, and he watched them like a man who is
working out a problem in his mind.  They were abreast of Honfleur now,
and about half a mile out from it.  Several sloops and brigs were lying
there in a cluster, and a whole fleet of brown-sailed fishing-boats were
tacking slowly in.  Yet all was quiet on the curving quay and on the
half-moon fort over which floated the white flag with the golden
_fleur-de-lis_.  The port lay on their quarter now and they were drawing
away more quickly as the breeze freshened.  De Catinat glancing back had
almost made up his mind that their fears were quite groundless when they
were brought back in an instant and more urgently than ever.

Round the corner of the mole a great dark boat had dashed into view,
ringed round with foam from her flying prow, and from the ten pairs of
oars which swung from either side of her.  A dainty white ensign drooped
over her stern, and in her bows the sun's light was caught by a heavy
brass carronade.  She was packed with men, and the gleam which twinkled
every now and again from amongst them told that they were armed to the
teeth.  The captain brought his glass to bear upon them and whistled.
Then he glanced up at the clouds once more.

"Thirty men," said he, "and they go three paces to our two.  You, sir,
take your blue coat off this deck or you'll bring trouble upon us.
The Lord will look after His own if they'll only keep from foolishness.
Get these hatches off, Tomlinson.  So!  Where's Jim Sturt and Hiram
Jefferson?  Let them stand by to clap them on again when I whistle.
Starboard!  Starboard!  Keep her as full as she'll draw.  Now, Amos, and
you, Tomlinson, come here until I have a word  with you."

The three stood in consultation upon the poop, glancing back at their
pursuers.  There could be no doubt that the wind was freshening; it blew
briskly in their faces as they looked back, but it was not steady yet,
and the boat was rapidly overhauling them.  Already they could see the
faces of the marines who sat in the stern, and the gleam of the lighted
linstock which the gunner held in his hand.

"_Hola!_" cried an officer in excellent English.  "Lay her to or we
fire"

"Who are you, and what do you want?" shouted Ephraim Savage, in a voice
that might have been heard from the bank.

"We come in the king's name, and we want a party of Huguenots from Paris
who came on board of your vessel at Rouen."

"Brace back the foreyard and lay her to," shouted the captain.  "Drop a
ladder over the side there and look smart!  So!  Now we are ready for
them."

The yard was swung round and the vessel lay quietly rising and falling
on the waves.  The boat dashed alongside, her brass cannon trained upon
the brigantine, and her squad of marines with their fingers upon their
triggers ready to open fire.  They grinned and shrugged their shoulders
when they saw that their sole opponents were three unarmed men upon the
poop.  The officer, a young active fellow with a bristling moustache,
like the whiskers of a cat, was on deck in an instant with his drawn
sword in his hand.

"Come up, two of you!" he cried.  "You stand here at the head of the
ladder, sergeant.  Throw up a rope and you can fix it to this stanchion.
Keep awake down there and be all ready to fire!  You come with me,
Corporal Lemoine.  Who is captain of this ship?"

"I am, sir," said Ephraim Savage submissively.

"You have three Huguenots aboard?"

"Tut! tut!  Huguenots, are they?  I thought they were very anxious to
get away, but as long as they paid their passage it was no business of
mine.  An old man, his daughter, and a young fellow about your age in
some sort of livery."

"In uniform, sir! The uniform of the king's guard.  Those are the folk I
have come for."

"And you wish to take them back?"

"Most certainly."

"Poor folk!  I am sorry for them."

"And so am I, but orders are orders and must be done."

"Quite so.  Well, the old man is in his bunk asleep.  The maid is in a
cabin below.  And the other is sleeping down the hold there where we
had to put him, for there is no room elsewhere."

"Sleeping, you say?  We had best surprise him."

"But think you that you dare do it alone!  He has no arms, it is true,
but he is a well-grown young fellow.  Will you not have twenty men up
from the boat?"

Some such thought had passed through the officer's head, but the
captain's remark put him upon his mettle.

"Come with me, corporal," said he.  "Down this ladder, you say?"

"Yes, down the ladder and straight on.  He lies between those two cloth
bales."  Ephraim Savage looked up with a smile playing about the corners
of his grim mouth.  The wind was whistling now in the rigging, and the
stays of the mast were humming like two harp strings.  Amos Green
lounged beside the French sergeant who guarded the end of the rope
ladder, while Tomlinson, the mate, stood with a bucket of water in his
hand exchanging remarks in very bad French with the crew of the boat
beneath him.

The officer made his way slowly down the ladder which led into the hold,
and the corporal followed him, and had his chest level with the deck
when the other had reached the bottom.  It may have been something in
Ephraim Savage's face, or it may have been the gloom around him which
startled the young Frenchman, but a sudden suspicion flashed into his
mind.

"Up again, corporal!" he shouted, "I think that you are best at the
top."

"And I think that you are best down below, my friend," said the Puritan,
who gathered the officer's meaning from his gesture.  Putting the sole
of his boot against the man's chest he gave a shove which sent both him
and the ladder crashing down on to the officer beneath him.  As he did
so he blew his whistle, and in a moment the hatch was back in its place
and clamped down on each side with iron bars.

The sergeant had swung round at the sound of the crash, but Amos Green,
who had waited for the movement, threw his arms about him and hurled him
overboard into the sea.  At the same instant the connecting rope was
severed, the foreyard creaked back into position again, and the
bucketful of salt water soused down over the gunner and his gun, putting
out his linstock and wetting his priming.  A shower of balls from the
marines piped through the air or rapped up against the planks, but the
boat was tossing and jerking in the short choppy waves and to aim was
impossible.  In vain the men tugged and strained at their oars while the
gunner worked like a maniac to relight his linstock and to replace his
priming.  The boat had lost its weigh, while the brigantine was flying
along now with every sail bulging and swelling to bursting-point.
Crack! went the carronade at last, and five little slits in the mainsail
showed that her charge of grape had flown high.  Her second shot left no
trace behind it, and at the third she was at the limit of her range.
Half an hour afterwards a little dark dot upon the horizon with a golden
speck at one end of it was all that could be seen of the Honfleur
guard-boat.  Wider and wider grew the low-lying shores, broader and
broader was the vast spread of blue waters ahead, the smoke of Havre lay
like a little cloud upon the northern horizon, and Captain Ephraim
Savage paced his deck with his face as grim as ever, but with a dancing
light in his gray eyes.

"I knew that the Lord would look after His own," said he complacently.
"We've got her beak straight now, and there's not as much as a dab of
mud betwixt this and the three hills of Boston.  You've had too much of
these French wines of late, Amos, lad.  Come down and try a real Boston
brewing with a double stroke of malt in the mash tub."



CHAPTER XXV.


A BOAT OF THE DEAD.

For two days the _Golden Rod_ lay becalmed close to the Cape La Hague,
with the Breton coast extending along the whole of the southern horizon.
On the third morning, however, came a sharp breeze, and they drew
rapidly away from land, until it was but a vague dim line which blended
with the cloud banks.  Out there on the wide free ocean, with the wind
on their cheeks and the salt spray pringling upon their lips, these
hunted folk might well throw off their sorrows and believe that they had
left for ever behind them all tokens of those strenuous men whose
earnest piety had done more harm than frivolity and wickedness could
have accomplished.  And yet even now they could not shake off their
traces, for the sin of the cottage is bounded by the cottage door, but
that of the palace spreads its evil over land and sea.

"I am frightened about my father, Amory," said Adele, as they stood
together by the shrouds and looked back at the dim cloud upon the
horizon which marked the position of that France which they were never
to see again.

"But he is out of danger now."

"Out of danger from cruel laws, but I fear that he will never see the
promised land."

"What do you mean, Adele?  My uncle is hale and hearty."

"Ah, Amory, his very heart-roots were fastened in the Rue St. Martin,
and when they were torn his life was torn also.  Paris and his business,
they were the world to him."

"But he will accustom himself to this new life."

"If it only could be so!  But I fear, I fear, that he is over old for
such a change.  He says not a word of complaint.  But I read upon his
face that he is stricken to the heart.  For hours together he will gaze
back at France, with the tears running silently down his cheeks.
And his hair has turned from gray to white within the week."

De Catinat also had noticed that the gaunt old Huguenot had grown
gaunter, that the lines upon his stern face were deeper, and that his
head fell forward upon his breast as he walked.  He was about, however,
to suggest that the voyage might restore the merchant's health, when
Adele gave a cry of surprise and pointed out over the port quarter.
So beautiful was she at the instant with her raven hair blown back by
the wind, a glow of colour struck into her pale cheeks by the driving
spray, her lips parted in her excitement, and one white hand shading her
eyes, that he stood beside her with all his thoughts bent upon her grace
and her sweetness.

"Look!" she cried.  "There is something floating upon the sea.  I saw it
upon the crest of a wave."

He looked in the direction in which she pointed, but at first he saw
nothing.  The wind was still behind them, and a brisk sea was running of
a deep rich green colour, with long creamy curling caps to the larger
waves.  The breeze would catch these foam-crests from time to time, and
then there would be a sharp spatter upon the decks, with a salt smack
upon the lips, and a pringling in the eyes.  Suddenly as he gazed,
however, something black was tilted up upon the sharp summit of one of
the seas, and swooped out of view again upon the further side.  It was
so far from him that he could make nothing of it, but sharper eyes than
his had caught a glance of it.  Amos Green had seen the girl point and
observed what it was which had attracted her attention.

"Captain Ephraim," cried he, "there's a boat on the starboard quarter."

The New England seaman whipped up his glass and steadied it upon the
bulwark.

"Ay, it's a boat," said he, "but an empty one.  Maybe it's been washed
off from some ship, or gone adrift from shore.  Put her hard down, Mr.
Tomlinson, for it just so happens that I am in need of a boat at
present."

Half a minute later the _Golden Rod_ had swung round and was running
swiftly down towards the black spot which still bobbed and danced upon
the waves.  As they neared her they could see that something was
projecting over her side.

"It's a man's head!" cried Amos Green.

But Ephraim Savage's grim face grew grimmer.  "It's a man's foot," said
he.  "I think that you had best take the gal below to the cabin."

Amid a solemn hush they ran alongside this lonely craft which hung out
so sinister a signal.  Within ten yards of her the foreyard was hauled
aback and they gazed down upon her terrible crew.

She was a little thirteen-foot cockle-shell, very broad for her length
and so flat in the bottom that she had been meant evidently for river or
lake work.  Huddled together beneath the seats were three folk, a man in
the dress of a respectable artisan, a woman of the same class, and a
little child about a year old.  The boat was half full of water and the
woman and child were stretched with their faces downwards, the fair
curls of the infant and the dark locks of the mother washing to and fro
like water-weeds upon the surface.  The man lay with a slate-coloured
face, his chin cocking up towards the sky, his eyes turned upwards to
the whites, and his mouth wide open showing a leathern crinkled tongue
like a rotting leaf.  In the bows, all huddled in a heap, and with a
single paddle still grasped in his hand, there crouched a very small man
clad in black, an open book lying across his face, and one stiff leg
jutting upwards with the heel of the foot resting between the rowlocks.
So this strange company swooped and tossed upon the long green Atlantic
rollers.

A boat had been lowered by the _Golden Rod_, and the unfortunates were
soon conveyed upon deck.  No particle of either food or drink was to be
found, nor anything save the single paddle and the open Bible which lay
across the small man's face.  Man, woman, and child had all been dead a
day at the least, and so with the short prayers used upon the seas they
were buried from the vessel's side.  The small man had at first seemed
also to be lifeless, but Amos had detected some slight flutter of his
heart, and the faintest haze was left upon the watch glass which was
held before his mouth.  Wrapped in a dry blanket he was laid beside the
mast, and the mate forced a few drops of rum every few minutes between
his lips until the little spark of life which still lingered in him
might be fanned to a flame.  Meanwhile Ephraim Savage had ordered up the
two prisoners whom he had entrapped at Honfleur.  Very foolish they
looked as they stood blinking and winking in the daylight from which
they had been so long cut off.

"Very sorry, captain," said the seaman, "but either you had to come with
us, d'ye see, or we had to stay with you.  They're waiting for me over
at Boston, and in truth I really couldn't tarry."

The French soldier shrugged his shoulders and looked around him with a
lengthening face.  He and his corporal were limp with sea-sickness, and
as miserable as a Frenchman is when first he finds that France has
vanished from his view.

"Which would you prefer, to go on with us to America, or go back to
France?"

"Back to France, if I can find my way.  Oh, I must get to France again
if only to have a word with that fool of a gunner."

"Well, we emptied a bucket of water over his linstock and priming, d'ye
see, so maybe he did all he could.  But there's France, where that
thickening is over yonder."

"I see it!  I see it!  Ah, if my feet were only upon it once more."

"There is a boat beside us, and you may take it."

"My God, what happiness! Corporal Lemoine, the boat!  Let us push off at
once."

"But you need a few things first.  Good Lord, who ever heard of a man
pushing off like that!  Mr. Tomlinson, just sling a keg of water and a
barrel of meat and of biscuit into this boat.  Hiram Jefferson, bring
two oars aft.  It's a long pull with the wind in your teeth, but you'll
be there by to-morrow night, and the weather is set fair."

The two Frenchmen were soon provided with all that they were likely to
require, and pushed off with a waving of hats and a shouting of _bon
voyage_.  The foreyard was swung round again and the _Golden Rod_ turned
her bowsprit for the west.  For hours a glimpse could be caught of the
boat, dwindling away on the wave-tops, until at last it vanished into
the haze, and with it vanished the very last link which connected them
with the great world which they were leaving behind them.

But whilst these things had been done, the senseless man beneath the
mast had twitched his eyelids, had drawn a little gasping breath, and
then finally had opened his eyes.  His skin was like gray parchment
drawn tightly over his bones, and the limbs which thrust out from his
clothes were those of a sickly child.  Yet, weak as he was, the large
black eyes with which he looked about him were full of dignity and
power.  Old Catinat had come upon deck, and at the sight of the man and
of his dress he had run forward, and had raised his head reverently and
rested it in his own arms.

"He is one of the faithful," he cried, "he is one of our pastors.  Ah,
now indeed a blessing will be upon our journey!"

But the man smiled gently and shook his head.  "I fear that I may not
come this journey with you," said he, "for the Lord has called me upon
a further journey of my own.  I have had my summons and I am ready.
I am indeed the pastor of the temple at Isigny, and when we heard the
orders of the wicked king, I and two of the faithful with their little
one put forth in the hope that we might come to England.  But on the
first day there came a wave which swept away one of our oars and all
that was in the boat, our bread, our keg, and we were left with no hope
save in Him.  And then He began to call us to Him one at a time, first
the child, and then the woman, and then the man, until I only am left,
though I feel that my own time is not long.  But since ye are also of
the faithful, may I not serve you in any way before I go?"

The merchant shook his head, and then suddenly a thought flashed upon
him, and he ran with joy upon his face and whispered eagerly to Amos
Green.  Amos laughed, and strode across to the captain.

"It's time," said Ephraim Savage grimly.

Then the whisperers went to De Catinat.  He sprang in the air and his
eyes shone with delight.  And then they went down to Adele in her cabin,
and she started and blushed, and turned her sweet face away, and patted
her hair with her hands as woman will when a sudden call is made upon
her.  And so, since haste was needful, and since even there upon the
lonely sea there was one coming who might at any moment snap their
purpose, they found themselves in a few minutes, this gallant man and
this pure woman, kneeling hand in hand before the dying pastor, who
raised his thin arm feebly in benediction as he muttered the words which
should make them forever one.

Adele had often pictured her wedding to herself, as what young girl has
not?  Often in her dreams she had knelt before the altar with Amory in
the temple of the Rue St. Martin.  Or sometimes her fancy had taken her
to some of those smaller churches in the provinces, those little refuges
where a handful of believers gathered together, and it was there that
her thoughts had placed the crowning act of a woman's life.  But when
had she thought of such a marriage as this, with the white deck swaying
beneath them, the ropes humming above, their only choristers the gulls
which screamed around them, and their wedding hymn the world-old anthem
which is struck from the waves by the wind?  And when could she forget
the scene?  The yellow masts and the bellying sails, the gray drawn face
and the cracked lips of the castaway, her father's gaunt earnest
features as he knelt to support the dying minister, De Catinat in his
blue coat, already faded and weather-stained.  Captain Savage with his
wooden face turned towards the clouds, and Amos Green with his hands in
his pockets and a quiet twinkle in his blue eyes!  Then behind all the
lanky mate and the little group of New England seamen with their
palmetto hats and their serious faces!

And so it was done amid kindly words in a harsh foreign tongue, and the
shaking of rude hands hardened by the rope and the oar.  De Catinat and
his wife leaned together by the shrouds when all was over and watched
the black side as it rose and fell, and the green water which raced past
them.

"It is all so strange and so new," she said.  "Our future seems as vague
and dark as yonder cloud-banks which gather in front of us."

"If it rest with me," he answered, "your future will be as merry and
bright as the sunlight that glints on the crest of these waves.
The country that drove us forth lies far behind us, but out there is
another and a fairer country, and every breath of wind wafts us nearer
to it.  Freedom awaits us there, and we bear with us youth and love, and
what could man or woman ask for more?"

So they stood and talked while the shadows deepened into twilight and
the first faint gleam of the stars broke out in the darkening heavens
above them.  But ere those stars had waned again one more toiler had
found rest aboard the _Golden Rod_, and the scattered flock from Isigny
had found their little pastor once more.



CHAPTER XXVI.


THE LAST PORT.

For three weeks the wind kept at east or north-east, always at a brisk
breeze and freshening sometimes into half a gale.  The _Golden Rod_ sped
merrily upon her way with every sail drawing, alow and aloft, so that by
the end of the third week Amos and Ephraim Savage were reckoning out the
hours before they would look upon their native land once more.  To the
old seaman who was used to meeting and to parting it was a small matter,
but Amos, who had never been away before, was on fire with impatience,
and would sit smoking for hours with his legs astride the shank of the
bowsprit, staring ahead at the skyline, in the hope that his friend's
reckoning had been wrong, and that at any moment he might see the
beloved coast line looming up in front of him.

"It's no use, lad," said Captain Ephraim, laying his great red hand upon
his shoulder.  "They that go down to the sea in ships need a power of
patience, and there's no good eatin' your heart out for what you can't
get."

"There's a feel of home about the air, though," Amos answered.
"It seems to whistle through your teeth with a bite to it that I never
felt over yonder.  Ah, it will take three months of the Mohawk Valley
before I feel myself to rights."

"Well," said his friend, thrusting a plug of Trinidado tobacco into the
corner of his cheek, "I've been on the sea since I had hair to my face,
mostly in the coast trade, d'ye see, but over the water as well, as far
as those navigation laws would let me.  Except the two years that I came
ashore for the King Philip business, when every man that could carry a
gun was needed on the border, I've never been three casts of a biscuit
from salt water, and I tell you that I never knew a better crossing than
the one we have just made."

"Ay, we have come along like a buck before a forest fire.  But it is
strange to me how you find your way so clearly out here with never track
nor trail to guide you.  It would puzzle me, Ephraim, to find America,
to say nought of the Narrows of New York."

"I am somewhat too far to the north, Amos.  We have been on or about the
fiftieth since we sighted Cape La Hague.  To-morrow we should make land,
by my reckonin'."

"Ah, to-morrow!  And what will it be?  Mount Desert?  Cape Cod?
Long Island?"

"Nay, lad, we are in the latitude of the St. Lawrence, and are more like
to see the Arcadia coast.  Then with this wind a day should carry us
south, or two at the most.  A few more such voyages and I shall buy
myself a fair brick house in Green Lane of North Boston, where I can
look down on the bay, or on the Charles or the Mystic, and see the ships
comin' and goin'.  So I would end my life in peace and quiet."

All day Amos Green, in spite of his friend's assurance, strained his
eyes in the fruitless search for land, and when at last the darkness
fell he went below and laid out his fringed hunting tunic, his leather
gaiters, and his raccoon-skin cap, which were very much more to his
taste than the broadcloth coat in which the Dutch mercer of New York had
clad him.  De Catinat had also put on the dark coat of civil life, and
he and Adele were busy preparing all things for the old man, who had
fallen so weak that there was little which he could do for himself.
A fiddle was screaming in the forecastle, and half the night through
hoarse bursts of homely song mingled with the dash of the waves and the
whistle of the wind, as the New England men in their own grave and
stolid fashion made merry over their home-coming.

The mate's watch that night was from twelve to four, and the moon was
shining brightly for the first hour of it.  In the early morning,
however, it clouded over, and the _Golden Rod_ plunged into one of those
dim clammy mists which lie on all that tract of ocean.  So thick was it
that from the poop one could just make out the loom of the foresail, but
could see nothing of the fore-topmast-stay sail or the jib.  The wind
was north-east with a very keen edge to it, and the dainty brigantine
lay over, scudding along with her lee rails within hand's touch of the
water.  It had suddenly turned very cold--so cold that the mate stamped
up and down the poop, and his four seamen shivered together under the
shelter of the bulwarks.  And then in a moment one of them was up,
thrusting with his forefinger into the air and screaming, while a huge
white wall sprang out of the darkness at the very end of the bowsprit,
and the ship struck with a force which snapped her two masts like dried
reeds in a wind, and changed her in an instant to a crushed and
shapeless heap of spars and wreckage.

The mate had shot the length of the poop at the shock, and had narrowly
escaped from the falling mast, while of his four men two had been hurled
through the huge gap which yawned in the bows, while a third had dashed
his head to pieces against the stock of the anchor.  Tomlinson staggered
forwards to find the whole front part of the vessel driven inwards, and
a single seaman sitting dazed amid splintered spars, flapping sails, and
writhing, lashing cordage.  It was still as dark as pitch, and save the
white crest of a leaping wave nothing was to be seen beyond the side of
the vessel.  The mate was peering round him in despair at the ruin which
had come so suddenly upon them when he found Captain Ephraim at his
elbow, half clad, but as wooden and as serene as ever.

"An iceberg," said he, sniffing at the chill air.  "Did you not smell
it, friend Tomlinson?"

"Truly I found it cold, Captain Savage, but I set it down to the mist."

"There is a mist ever set around them, though the Lord in His wisdom
knows best why, for it is a sore trial to poor sailor men.  She makes
water fast, Mr. Tomlinson.  She is down by the bows already."

The other watch had swarmed upon deck and one of them was measuring the
well.  "There is three feet of water," he cried, "and the pumps sucked
dry yesterday at sundown."

"Hiram Jefferson and John Moreton to the pumps!" cried the captain.
"Mr. Tomlinson, clear away the long-boat and let us see if we may set
her right, though I fear that she is past mending."

"The long-boat has stove two planks," cried a seaman.

"The jolly-boat, then?"

"She is in three pieces."

The mate tore his hair, but Ephraim Savage smiled like a man who is
gently tickled by some coincidence.

"Where is Amos Green?"

"Here, Captain Ephraim.  What can I do?"

"And I?" asked De Catinat eagerly.  Adele and her father had been
wrapped in mantles and placed for shelter in the lee of the round house.

"Tell him he can take his spell at the pumps," said the Captain to Amos.
"And you, Amos, you are a handy man with a tool.  Get into yonder
long-boat with a lantern and see if you cannot patch her up."

For half an hour Amos Green hammered and trimmed and caulked, while the
sharp measured clanking of the pumps sounded above the dash of the seas.
Slowly, very slowly, the bows of the brigantine were settling down, and
her stern cocking up.

"You've not much time, Amos, lad," said the captain quietly.

"She'll float now, though she's not quite water-tight."

"Very good.  Lower away!  Keep up the pump in there!  Mr. Tomlinson, see
that provisions and water are ready, as much as she will hold.  Come
with me, Hiram Jefferson."

The seaman and the captain swung themselves down into the tossing boat,
the latter with a lantern strapped to his waist.  Together they made
their way until they were under her mangled bows.  The captain shook his
head when he saw the extent of the damage.

"Cut away the foresail and pass it over," said he.

Tomlinson and Amos Green cut away the lashings with their knives and
lowered the corner of the sail.  Captain Ephraim and the seaman seized
it, and dragged it across the mouth of the huge gaping leak.  As he
stooped to do it, however, the ship heaved up upon a swell, and the
captain saw in the yellow light of his lantern sinuous black cracks
which radiated away backwards from the central hole.

"How much in the well?" he asked.

"Five and a half feet."

"Then the ship is lost.  I could put my finger between her planks as far
as I can see back.  Keep the pumps going there!  Have you the food and
water, Mr. Tomlinson?"

"Here, sir."

"Lower them over the bows.  This boat cannot live more than an hour or
two.  Can you see anything of the berg?"

"The fog is lifting on the starboard quarter," cried one of the men.
"Yes, there is the berg, quarter of a mile to leeward!"

The mist had thinned away suddenly, and the moon glimmered through once
more upon the great lonely sea and the stricken ship.  There, like a
huge sail, was the monster piece of ice upon which they had shattered
themselves, rocking slowly to and fro with the wash of the waves.

"You must make for her," said Captain Ephraim.  "There is no other
chance.  Lower the gal over the bows!  Well, then, her father first, if
she likes it better.  Tell them to sit still, Amos, and that the Lord
will bear us up if we keep clear of foolishness.  So!  You're a brave
lass for all your niminy-piminy lingo.  Now the keg and the barrel, and
all the wraps and cloaks you can find.  Now the other man, the
Frenchman.  Ay, ay, passengers first, and you have got to come.
Now, Amos!  Now the seamen, and you last, friend Tomlinson."

It was well that they had not very far to go, for the boat was weighed
down almost to the edge, and it took the baling of two men to keep in
check the water which leaked in between the shattered planks.  When all
were safely in their places.  Captain Ephraim Savage swung himself
aboard again, which was but too easy now that every minute brought the
bows nearer to the water.  He came back with a bundle of clothing which
he threw into the boat.

"Push off!" he cried.

"Jump in, then."

"Ephraim Savage goes down with his ship," said he quietly.  "Friend
Tomlinson, it is not my way to give my orders more than once.  Push off,
I say!"

The mate thrust her out with a boat-hook.  Amos and De Catinat gave a
cry of dismay, but the stolid New Englanders settled down to their oars
and pulled off for the iceberg.

"Amos! Amos! Will you suffer it?" cried the guardsman in French.
"My honour will not permit me to leave him thus.  I should feel it a
stain for ever."

"Tomlinson, you would not leave him!  Go on board and force him to
come."

"The man is not living who could force him to do what he had no mind
for."

"He may change his purpose."

"He never changes his purpose."

"But you cannot leave him, man!  You must at least lie by and pick him
up."

"The boat leaks like a sieve," said the mate.  "I will take her to the
berg, leave you all there, if we can find footing, and go back for the
captain.  Put your heart into it, my lads, for the sooner we are there
the sooner we shall get back."

But they had not taken fifty strokes before Adele gave a sudden scream.

"My God!" she cried, "the ship is going down!"

She had settled lower and lower in the water, and suddenly with a sound
of rending planks she thrust down her bows like a diving water-fowl, her
stern flew up into the air, and with a long sucking noise she shot down
swifter and swifter until the leaping waves closed over her high poop
lantern.  With one impulse the boat swept round again and made backwards
as fast as willing arms could pull it.  But all was quiet at the scene
of the disaster.  Not even a fragment of wreckage was left upon the
surface to show where the _Golden Rod_ had found her last harbour.
For a long quarter of an hour they pulled round and round in the
moonlight, but not a glimpse could they see of the Puritan seaman, and
at last, when in spite of the balers the water was washing round their
ankles, they put her head about once more, and made their way in silence
and with heavy hearts to their dreary island of refuge.

Desolate as it was, it was their only hope now, for the leak was
increasing and it was evident that the boat could not be kept afloat
long.  As they drew nearer they saw with dismay that the side which
faced them was a solid wall of ice sixty feet high without a flaw or
crevice in its whole extent.  The berg was a large one, fifty paces at
least each way, and there was a hope that the other side might be more
favourable.  Baling hard, they paddled round the corner, but only to
find themselves faced by another gloomy ice-crag.  Again they went
round, and again they found that the berg increased rather than
diminished in height.  There remained only one other side, and they
knew as they rowed round to it that their lives hung upon the result,
for the boat was almost settling down beneath them.  They shot out from
the shadow into the full moonlight and looked upon a sight which none of
them would forget until their dying day.

The cliff which faced them was as precipitous as any  of the others, and
it glimmered and sparkled all over where the silver light fell upon the
thousand facets of ice.  Right in the centre, however, on a level with
the water's edge, there was what appeared to be a huge hollowed-out cave
which marked the spot where the Golden Rod had, in shattering herself,
dislodged a huge boulder, and so amid her own ruin prepared a refuge for
those who had trusted themselves to her.  This cavern was of the richest
emerald green, light and clear at the edges, but toning away into the
deepest purples and blues at the back.  But it was not the beauty of
this grotto, nor was it the assurance of rescue which brought a cry of
joy and of wonder from every lip, but it was that, seated upon an ice
boulder and placidly  smoking a long corn-cob pipe, there was perched in
front of them no less a person than Captain Ephraim Savage of Boston.
For a moment the castaways could almost have believed that it was his
wraith, were wraiths ever seen in so homely an attitude, but the tones
of his voice very soon showed that it was indeed he, and in no very
Christian temper either.

"Friend Tomlinson," said he, "when I tell you to row for an iceberg I
mean you to row right away there, d'ye see, and not to go philandering
about over the ocean.  It's not your fault that I'm not froze, and so I
would have been if I hadn't some dry tobacco and my tinder-box to keep
myself warm."

Without stopping to answer his commander's reproaches, the mate headed
for the ledge, which had been cut into a slope by the bows of the
brigantine, so that the boat was run up easily on to the ice.  Captain
Savage seized his dry clothes and vanished into the back of the cave, to
return presently warmer in body, and more contented in mind.  The
long-boat had been turned upside down for a seat, the gratings and
thwarts taken out and covered with wraps to make a couch for the lady,
and the head knocked out of the keg of biscuits.

"We were frightened for you, Ephraim," said Amos Green.  "I had a heavy
heart this night when I thought that I should never see you more."

"Tut, Amos, you should have known me better."

"But how came you here, captain?" asked Tomlinson.  "I thought that
maybe you had been taken down by the suck of the ship."

"And so I was.  It is the third ship in which I have gone down, but they
have never kept me down yet.  I went deeper to-night than when the
_Speedwell_ sank, but not so deep as in the _Governor Winthrop_.  When I
came up I swam to the berg, found this nook, and crawled in.  Glad I was
to see you, for I feared that you had foundered."

"We put back to pick you up and we passed you in the darkness.  And what
should we do now?"

"Rig up that boat-sail and make quarters for the gal.  Then get our
supper and such rest as we can, for there is nothing to be done
to-night, and there may be much in the morning."



CHAPTER XXVII.


A DWINDLING ISLAND.

Amos Green was aroused in the morning by a hand upon his shoulder, and
springing to his feet, found De Catinat standing beside him.
The survivors of the crew were grouped about the upturned boat,
slumbering heavily after their labours of the night.  The red rim of the
sun had just pushed itself above the water-line, and sky and sea were
one blaze of scarlet and orange from the dazzling gold of the horizon to
the lightest pink at the zenith.  The first rays flashed directly into
their cave, sparkling and glimmering upon the ice crystals and tingeing
the whole grotto with a rich warm light.  Never was a fairy's palace
more lovely than this floating refuge which Nature had provided for
them.

But neither the American nor the Frenchman had time now to give a
thought to the novelty and beauty of their situation.  The latter's face
was grave, and his friend read danger in his eyes.

"What is it, then?"

"The berg.  It is coming to pieces."

"Tut, man, it is as solid as an island."

"I have been watching it.  You see that crack which extends backwards
from the end of our grotto.  Two hours ago I could scarce put my hand
into it.  Now I can slip through it with ease.  I tell you that she is
splitting across."

Amos Green walked to the end of the funnel-shaped recess and found, as
his friend had said, that a green sinuous crack extended away backwards
into the iceberg, caused either by the tossing of the waves, or by the
terrific impact of their vessel.  He roused Captain Ephraim and pointed
out the danger to him.

"Well, if she springs a leak we are gone," said he.  "She's been thawing
pretty fast as it is."

They could see now that what had seemed in the moonlight to be smooth
walls of ice were really furrowed and wrinkled like an old man's face by
the streams of melted water which were continually running down them.
The whole huge mass was brittle and honeycombed and rotten.  Already
they could hear all round them the ominous drip, drip, and the splash
and tinkle of the little rivulets as  they fell into the ocean.

"Hullo!" cried Amos Green, "what's that?"

"What then?"

"Did you hear nothing?"

"No."

"I could have sworn that I heard a voice."

"Impossible.  We are all here."

"It must have been my fancy then."

Captain Ephraim walked to the seaward face of the cave and swept the
ocean with his eyes.  The wind had quite fallen away now, and the sea
stretched away to the eastward, smooth and unbroken save for a single
great black spar which floated near the spot where the _Golden  Rod_ had
foundered.

"We should lie in the track of some ships," said the captain
thoughtfully. "There's the codders and the herring-busses.  We're over
far south for them, I reckon.  But we can't be more'n two hundred mile
from Port Royal in Arcadia, and we're in the line of the St. Lawrence
trade.  If I had three white mountain pines, Amos, and a hundred yards
of stout canvas I'd get up on the top of this thing, d'ye see, and I'd
rig such a jury-mast as would send her humming into Boston Bay.  Then
I'd break her up and sell her for what she was worth, and turn a few
pieces over the business.  But she's a heavy old craft, and that's a
fact, though even now she might do a knot or two an hour if she had a
hurricane behind her.  But what is it, Amos?"

The young hunter was standing with his ear slanting, his head bent
forwards, and his eyes glancing sideways like a man who listens
intently.  He was about to answer when De Catinat gave a cry and pointed
to the back of the cave.

"Look at the crack now."

It had widened by a foot since they had noticed it last, until it was
now no longer a crack.  It was a pass.

"Let us go through," said the captain.

"It can but come out on the other side."

"Then let us see the other side."

He led the way and the other two followed him.  It was very dark as they
advanced, with high dripping ice walls on either side and one little
zigzagging slit of blue sky above their heads.  Tripping and groping
their way, they stumbled along until suddenly the passage grew wider and
opened out into a large square of flat ice.  The berg was level in the
centre and sloped upwards from that point to the high cliffs which
bounded it on each side.  In three directions this slope was very steep,
but in one it slanted up quite gradually, and the constant thawing had
grooved the surface with a thousand irregularities by which an active
man could ascend.  With one impulse they began all three to clamber up
until a minute later they were standing not far from the edge of the
summit, seventy feet above the sea, with a view which took in a good
fifty miles of water.  In all that fifty miles there was no sign of
life, nothing but the endless glint of the sun upon the waves.

Captain Ephraim whistled.  "We are out of luck," said he.

Amos Green looked about him with startled eyes.  "I cannot understand
it," said he.  "I could have sworn--By the eternal, listen to that!" The
clear call of a military bugle rang out in the morning air.  With a cry
of amazement they all three craned forward and peered over the edge.

A large ship was lying under the very shadow of the iceberg.  They
looked straight down upon her snow-white decks, fringed with shining
brass cannon, and dotted with seamen. A little clump of soldiers stood
upon the poop going through the manual exercise, and it was from them
that the call had come which had sounded so unexpectedly in the ears of
the castaways.  Standing back from the edge, they had not only looked
over the top-masts of this welcome neighbour, but they had themselves
been invisible from her decks.  Now the discovery was mutual, as was
shown by a chorus of shouts and cries from beneath them.

But the three did not wait an instant.  Sliding and  scrambling down the
wet, slippery incline, they rushed shouting through the crack and into
the cave where their comrades had just been startled by the bugle-call
while in the middle of their cheerless breakfast.  A few hurried words
and the leaky long-boat had been launched, their possessions had been
bundled in, and they were afloat once more.  Pulling round a promontory
of the berg, they found themselves under the stern of a fine corvette,
the sides of which were lined with friendly faces, while from the peak
there drooped a huge white banner mottled over with the golden lilies of
France.  In a very few minutes their boat had been hauled up and they
found themselves on board the _St. Christophe_ man-of-war, conveying
Marquis de Denonville, the new Governor-General of Canada, to take over
his duties.



CHAPTER XXVIII.


IN THE POOL OF QUEBEC.

A singular colony it was of which the shipwrecked party found themselves
now to be members.  The _St. Christophe_ had left Rochelle three weeks
before with four small consorts conveying five hundred soldiers to help
the struggling colony on the St. Lawrence.  The squadron had become
separated, however, and the governor was pursuing his way alone in the
hope of picking up the others in the river.  Aboard he had a company of
the regiment of Quercy, the staff of his own household, Saint Vallier,
the new Bishop of Canada, with several of his attendants, three Recollet
friars, and five Jesuits bound for the fatal Iroquois mission,
half-a-dozen ladies on their way out to join their husbands, two
Ursuline nuns, ten or twelve gallants whom love of adventure and the
hope of bettering their fortunes had drawn across the seas, and lastly
some twenty peasant maidens of Anjou who were secure of finding husbands
waiting for them upon the beach, if only for the sake of the sheets, the
pot, the tin plates and the kettle which the king would provide for each
of his humble wards.

To add a handful of New England Independents, a Puritan of Boston, and
three Huguenots to such a gathering, was indeed to bring fire-brand and
powder-barrel together.  And yet all aboard were so busy with their own
concerns that the castaways were left very much to themselves.  Thirty
of the soldiers were down with fever and scurvy, and both priests and
nuns were fully taken up in nursing them.  Denonville, the governor, a
pious-minded dragoon, walked the deck all day reading the Psalms of
David, and sat up half the night with maps and charts laid out before
him, planning out the destruction of the Iroquois who were ravaging his
dominions.  The gallants and the ladies flirted, the maidens of Anjou
made eyes at the soldiers of Quercy, and the bishop Saint Vallier read
his offices and lectured his clergy.  Ephraim Savage used to stand all
day glaring at the good man as he paced the deck with his red-edged
missal in his hand, and muttering about the "abomination of desolation,"
but his little ways were put down to his exposure upon the iceberg, and
to the fixed idea in the French mind that men of the Anglo-Saxon stock
are not to be held accountable for  their actions.

There was peace between England and France at present, though feeling
ran high between Canada and New York, the French believing, and with
some justice, that the English colonists were whooping on the demons who
attacked them.  Ephraim and his men were therefore received hospitably
on board, though the ship was so crowded that they had to sleep wherever
they could find cover and space for their bodies.  The Catinats, too,
had been treated in an even more kindly fashion, the weak old man and
the beauty of his daughter arousing the interest of the governor
himself.  De Catinat had, during the voyage, exchanged his uniform for a
plain sombre suit, so that, except for his military bearing, there was
nothing to show that he was a fugitive from the army.  Old Catinat was
now so weak that he was past the answering of questions, his daughter
was forever at his side, and the soldier was diplomatist enough, after a
training at Versailles, to say much without saying anything, and so
their secret was still preserved.  De Catinat had known what it was to
be a Huguenot in Canada before the law was altered.  He had no wish to
try it after.

On the day after the rescue they sighted Cape Breton in the south, and
soon running swiftly before an easterly wind, saw the loom of the east
end of Anticosti.  Then they sailed up the mighty river, though from
mid-channel the banks upon either side were hardly to be seen.  As the
shores narrowed in, they saw the wild gorge of the Saguenay River upon
the right, with the smoke from the little fishing and trading station of
Tadousac streaming up above the pine trees.  Naked Indians with their
faces daubed with red clay, Algonquins and Abenakis, clustered round the
ship in their birchen canoes with fruit and vegetables from the land,
which brought fresh life to the scurvy-stricken soldiers.  Thence the
ship tacked on up the river past Mal Bay, the Ravine of the Eboulements
and the Bay of St. Paul with its broad valley and wooded mountains all
in a blaze with their beautiful autumn dress, their scarlets, their
purples, and their golds, from the maple, the ash, the young oak, and
the saplings of the birch.  Amos Green, leaning on the bulwarks, stared
with longing eyes at these vast expanses of virgin woodland, hardly
traversed save by an occasional wandering savage or hardy
_coureur-de-bois_.  Then the bold outline of Cape Tourmente loomed up
in front of them; they passed the rich placid meadows of Laval's
seigneury of Beaupre, and, skirting the settlements of the Island of
Orleans, they saw the broad pool stretch out in front of them, the falls
of Montmorenci, the high palisades of Cape Levi, the cluster of vessels,
and upon the right that wonderful rock with its diadem of towers and its
township huddled round its base, the centre and stronghold of French
power in America.  Cannon thundered from the bastions above, and were
echoed back by the warship, while ensigns dipped, hats waved, and a
swarm of boats and canoes shot out to welcome the new governor, and to
convey the soldiers and passengers to shore.

The old merchant had pined away since he had left French soil, like a
plant which has been plucked from its roots.  The shock of the shipwreck
and the night spent in their bleak refuge upon the iceberg had been too
much for his years and strength.  Since they had been picked up he had
lain amid the scurvy-stricken soldiers with hardly a sign of life save
for his thin breathing and the twitching of his scraggy throat.  Now,
however, at the sound of the cannon and the shouting he opened his eyes,
and raised himself slowly and painfully upon his pillow.  "What is it,
father?  What can we do for you?" cried Adele.  "We are in America, and
here is Amory and here am I, your children."

But the old man shook his head.  "The Lord has brought me to the
promised land, but He has not willed that I should enter into it," said
he.  "May His will be done, and blessed be His name forever!  But at
least I should wish, like Moses, to gaze upon it, if I cannot set foot
upon it.  Think you, Amory, that you could lend me your arm and lead me
on to the deck?"

"If I have another to help me," said De Catinat, and ascending to the
deck, he brought Amos Green back with him.  "Now, father, if you will
lay a hand upon the shoulder of each, you need scarce put your feet to
the  boards."

A minute later the old merchant was on the deck, and the two young men
had seated him upon a coil of rope with his back against the mast, where
he should be away from the crush.  The soldiers were already crowding
down into the boats, and all were so busy over their own affairs that
they paid no heed to the little group of refugees who gathered round the
stricken man.  He turned his head painfully from side to side, but his
eyes brightened as they fell upon the broad blue stretch of water, the
flash of the distant falls, the high castle, and the long line of purple
mountains away to the north-west.

"It is not like France," said he.  "It is not green and peaceful and
smiling, but it is grand and strong and stern like Him who made it.
As I have weakened, Adele, my soul has been less clogged by my body, and
I have seen clearly much that has been dim to me.  And it has seemed to
me, my children, that all this country of America, not Canada alone, but
the land where you were born also, Amos Green, and all that stretches
away towards yonder setting sun, will be the best gift of God to man.
For this has He held it concealed through all the ages, that now His own
high purpose may be wrought upon it.  For here is a land which is
innocent, which has no past guilt to atone for, no feud, nor ill custom,
nor evil of any kind.  And as the years roll on all the weary and
homeless ones, all who are stricken and landless and wronged, will turn
their faces to it, even as we have done.  And hence will come a nation
which will surely take all that is good and leave all that is bad,
moulding and fashioning itself into the highest.  Do I not see such a
mighty people, a people who will care more to raise their lowest than to
exalt their richest--who will understand that there is more bravery in
peace than in war, who will see that all men are brothers, and whose
hearts will not narrow themselves down to their own frontiers, but will
warm in sympathy with every noble cause the whole world through?
That is what I see, Adele, as I lie here beside a shore upon which I
shall never set my feet, and I say to you that if you and Amory go to
the building of such a nation then indeed your lives are not misspent.
It will come, and when it comes, may God guard it, may God watch over it
and direct it!"  His head had sunk gradually lower upon his breast and
his lids had fallen slowly over his eyes which had been looking away out
past Point Levi at the rolling woods and the far-off mountains.  Adele
gave a quick cry of despair and threw her arms round the old man's neck.

"He is dying, Amory, he is dying!" she cried.

A stern Franciscan friar, who had been telling his beads within a few
paces of them, heard the cry and was beside them in an instant.

"He is indeed dying," he said, as he gazed down at the ashen face.
"Has the old man had the sacraments of the Church?"

"I do not think that he needs them," answered De Catinat evasively.

"Which of us do not need them, young man!" said the friar sternly.  "And
how can a man hope for salvation without them?  I shall myself
administer them without delay."

But the old Huguenot had opened his eyes, and with a last flicker of
strength he pushed away the gray-hooded figure which bent over him.

"I left all that I love rather than yield to you," he cried, "and think
you that you can overcome me now?"

The Franciscan started back at the words, and his hard suspicious eyes
shot from De Catinat to the weeping girl.

"So!" said he.  "You are Huguenots, then!"

"Hush! Do not wrangle before a man who is dying!" cried De Catinat in a
voice as fierce as his own.

"Before a man who is dead," said Amos Green solemnly.

As he spoke the old man's face had relaxed, his thousand wrinkles had
been smoothed suddenly out, as though an invisible hand had passed over
them, and his head fell back against the mast.  Adele remained
motionless with her arms still clasped round his neck and her cheek
pressed against his shoulder.  She had fainted.

De Catinat raised his wife and bore her down to the cabin of one of the
ladies who had already shown them some kindness.  Deaths were no new
thing aboard the ship, for they had lost ten soldiers upon the outward
passage, so that amid the joy and bustle of the disembarking there were
few who had a thought to spare upon the dead pilgrim, and the less so
when it was whispered abroad that he had been a Huguenot.  A brief order
was given that he should be buried in the river that very night, and
then, save for a sailmaker who fastened the canvas round him, mankind
had done its last for Theophile Catinat.  With the survivors, however,
it was different, and when the troops were all disembarked, they were
mustered in a little group upon the deck, and an officer of the
governor's suite decided upon what should be done with them.  He was a
portly, good-humoured, ruddy-cheeked man, but De Catinat saw with
apprehension that the friar walked by his side as he advanced along the
deck, and exchanged a few whispered remarks with him.  There was a
bitter smile upon the monk's dark face which boded little good for the
heretics.

"It shall be seen to, good father, it shall be seen to," said the
officer impatiently, in answer to one of these whispered injunctions.
"I am as zealous a servant of Holy Church as you are."

"I trust that you are, Monsieur de Bonneville.  With so devout a
governor as Monsieur de Denonville, it  might be an ill thing even in
this world for the officers of his household to be lax."

The soldier glanced angrily at his companion, for he saw the threat
which lurked under the words.

"I would have you remember, father," said he, "that if faith is a
virtue, charity is no less so."  Then, speaking in English: "Which is
Captain Savage?"

"Ephraim Savage of Boston."

"And Master Amos Green?"

"Amos Green of New York."

"And Master Tomlinson?"

"John Tomlinson of Salem."

"And master mariners Hiram Jefferson, Joseph Cooper, Seek-grace Spalding,
and Paul Cushing, all of Massachusetts Bay?"

"We are all here."

"It is the governor's order that all whom I have named shall be conveyed
at once to the trading brig _Hope_, which is yonder ship with the white
paint line.  She sails within the hour for the English provinces."

A buzz of joy broke from the castaway mariners at the prospect of being
so speedily restored to their homes, and they hurried away to gather
together the few possessions which they had saved from the wreck.
The officer put his list in his pocket and stepped across to where De
Catinat leaned moodily against the bulwarks.

"Surely you remember me," he said.  "I could not forget your face, even
though you have exchanged a blue coat for a black one."

De Catinat grasped the hand which was held out to him.

"I remember you well, De Bonneville, and the journey that we made
together to Fort Frontenac, but it was not for me to claim your
friendship, now that things have gone amiss with me."

"Tut, man; once my friend always my friend."

"I feared, too, that my acquaintance would do you little good with
yonder dark-cowled friar who is glowering behind you."

"Well, well, you know how it is with us here.  Frontenac could keep them
in their place, but De la Barre was as clay in their hands, and this new
one promises to follow in his steps.  What with the Sulpitians at
Montreal and the Jesuits here, we poor devils are between the upper and
the nether stones.  But I am grieved from my heart to give such a
welcome as this to an old comrade, and still more to his wife."

"What is to be done, then?"

"You are to be confined to the ship until she sails, which will be in a
week at the furthest."

"And then?"

"You are to be carried home in her and handed over to the Governor of
Rochelle to be sent back to Paris.  Those are Monsieur de Denonville's
orders, and if they be not carried out to the letter, then we shall have
the whole hornet's nest about our ears."

De Catinat groaned as he listened.  After all their strivings and trials
and efforts, to return to Paris, the scorn of his enemies, and an object
of pity to his friends, was too deep a humiliation.  He flushed with
shame at the very thought.  To be led back like the home-sick peasant
who has deserted from his regiment!  Better one spring into the broad
blue river beneath him, were it not for little pale-faced Adele who had
none but him to look to.  It was so tame!  So ignominious!  And yet in
this floating prison, with a woman whose fate was linked with his own,
what hope was there of escape?

De Bonneville had left him, with a few blunt words of sympathy, but the
friar still paced the deck with a furtive glance at him from time to
time, and two soldiers who were stationed upon the poop passed and
repassed within a few yards of him.  They had orders evidently to mark
his movements.  Heart-sick he leaned over the side watching the Indians
in their paint and feathers shooting backwards and forwards in their
canoes, and staring across at the town where the gaunt gable ends of
houses and charred walls marked the effect of the terrible fire which a
few years before had completely destroyed the lower part.

As he stood gazing, his attention was drawn away by the swish of oars,
and a large boat full of men passed immediately underneath where he
stood.

It held the New Englanders, who were being conveyed to the ship which
was to take them home.  There were the four seamen huddled together, and
there in the sheets were Captain Ephraim Savage and Amos Green,
conversing together and pointing to the shipping.  The grizzled face of
the old Puritan and the bold features of the woodsman were turned more
than once in his direction, but no word of farewell and no kindly wave
of the hand came back to the lonely exile.  They were so full of their
own future and their own happiness, that they had not a thought to spare
upon his misery.  He could have borne anything from his enemies, but
this sudden neglect from his friends came too heavily after his other
troubles.  He stooped his face to his arms and burst in an instant into
a passion of sobs.  Before he raised his eyes again the brig had hoisted
her anchor, and was tacking under full canvas out of the Quebec basin.



CHAPTER XXIX.


THE VOICE AT THE PORT-HOLE.

That night old Theophile Catinat was buried from the ship's side, his
sole mourners the two who bore his own blood in their veins.  The next
day De Catinat spent upon deck, amid the bustle and confusion of the
unlading, endeavouring to cheer Adele by light chatter which came from a
heavy heart.  He pointed out to her the places which he had known so
well, the citadel where he had been quartered, the college of the
Jesuits, the cathedral of Bishop Laval, the magazine of the old company,
dismantled by the great fire, and the house of Aubert de la Chesnaye,
the only private one which had remained standing in the lower part.
From where they lay they could see not only the places of interest, but
something also of that motley population which made the town so
different to all others save only its younger sister, Montreal.  Passing
and repassing along the steep path with the picket fence which connected
the two quarters, they saw the whole panorama of Canadian life moving
before their eyes, the soldiers with their slouched hats, their plumes,
and their bandoleers, habitants from the river _cotes_ in their rude
peasant dresses, little changed from their forefathers of Brittany or
Normandy, and young rufflers from France or from the seigneuries, who
cocked their hats and swaggered in what they thought to be the true
Versailles fashion.  There, too, might be seen little knots of the men
of the woods, _coureurs-de-bois_ or _voyageurs_, with leathern hunting
tunics, fringed leggings, and fur cap with eagle feather, who came back
once a year to the cities, leaving their Indian wives and children in
some up-country wigwam.  Redskins, too, were there, leather-faced
Algonquin fishers and hunters, wild Micmacs from the east, and savage
Abenakis from the south, while everywhere were the dark habits of the
Franciscans, and the black cassocks and broad hats of the Recollets, and
Jesuits, the moving spirits of the whole.

Such were the folk who crowded the streets of the capital of this
strange offshoot of France which had been planted along the line of the
great river, a thousand leagues from the parent country.  And it was a
singular settlement, the most singular perhaps that has ever been made.
For a long twelve hundred miles it extended,  from Tadousac in the east,
away to the trading stations upon the borders of the great lakes,
limiting itself for the  most part to narrow cultivated strips upon the
margins of the river, banked in behind by wild forests and unexplored
mountains, which forever tempted the peasant from his hoe and his plough
to the freer life of the paddle and the musket.  Thin scattered
clearings, alternating with little palisaded clumps of log-hewn houses,
marked the line where civilisation was forcing itself in upon the huge
continent, and barely holding its own against the rigour of a northern
climate and the ferocity of merciless enemies.  The whole white
population of this mighty district, including soldiers, priests, and
woodmen, with all women and children, was very far short of twenty
thousand souls, and yet so great was their energy, and such the
advantage of the central government under which they lived, that they
had left their trace upon the whole continent.  When the prosperous
English settlers were content to live upon their acres, and when no axe
had rung upon the further side of the Alleghanies, the French had pushed
their daring pioneers, some in the black robe of the missionary, and
some in the fringed tunic of the hunter, to the uttermost ends of the
continent.  They had mapped out the lakes and had bartered with the
fierce Sioux on the great plains where the wooden wigwam gave place to
the hide tee-pee.  Marquette had followed the Illinois down to the
Mississippi, and had traced the course of the great river until, first
of all white men, he looked upon the turbid flood of the rushing
Missouri.  La Salle had ventured even further, and had passed the Ohio,
and had made his way to the Mexican Gulf, raising the French arms where
the city of New Orleans was afterwards to stand.  Others had pushed on
to the Rocky Mountains, and to the huge wilderness of the north-west,
preaching, bartering, cheating, baptising, swayed by many motives and
holding only in common a courage which never faltered and a fertility of
resource which took them in safety past every danger.  Frenchmen were to
the north of the British settlements, Frenchmen were to the west of
them, and Frenchmen were to the south of them, and if all the continent
is not now French, the fault assuredly did not rest with that iron race
of early Canadians.

All this De Catinat explained to Adele during the autumn day, trying to
draw her thoughts away from the troubles of the past, and from the long
dreary voyage which lay before her.  She, fresh from the staid life of
the Parisian street and from the tame scenery of the Seine, gazed with
amazement at the river, the woods and the mountains, and clutched her
husband's arm in horror when a canoeful of wild skin-clad Algonquins,
their faces striped with white and red paint, came flying past with
the foam dashing from their paddles.  Again the river turned from blue
to pink, again the old citadel was bathed in the evening glow, and again
the two exiles descended to their cabins with cheering words for each
other and heavy thoughts in their own hearts.

De Catinat's bunk was next to a port-hole, and it was his custom to keep
this open, as the caboose was close to him in which the cooking was done
for the crew, and the air was hot and heavy.  That night he found it
impossible to sleep, and he lay tossing under his blanket, thinking over
every possible means by which they might be able to get away from this
cursed ship.  But even if they got away, where could they go to then?
All Canada was sealed to them.  The woods to the south were full of
ferocious Indians.  The English settlements would, it was true, grant
them freedom to use their own religion, but what would his wife and he
do, without a friend, strangers among folk who spoke another tongue?
Had Amos Green remained true to them, then, indeed, all would have been
well.  But he had deserted them.  Of course there was no reason why he
should not.  He was no blood relation of theirs.  He had already
benefited them many times.  His own people and the life that he loved
were waiting for him at home.  Why should he linger here for the sake of
folk whom he had known but a few months?  It was not to be expected, and
yet De Catinat could not realise it, could not understand it.

But what was that?  Above the gentle lapping of the river he had
suddenly heard a sharp clear "Hist!"  Perhaps it was some passing
boatman or Indian.  Then it came again, that eager, urgent summons.
He sat up and stared about him.  It certainly must have come from the
open port-hole.  He looked out, but only to see the broad basin, with
the loom of the shipping, and the distant twinkle from the lights on
Point Levi.  As his head dropped back upon the pillow something fell
upon his chest with a little tap, and rolling off, rattled along the
boards.  He sprang up, caught a lantern from a hook, and flashed it upon
the floor.  There was the missile which had struck him--a little golden
brooch.  As he lifted it up and looked closer at it, a thrill passed
through him.  It had been his own, and he had given it to Amos Green
upon the second day that he had met him, when they were starting
together for Versailles.

This was a signal then, and Amos Green had not deserted them after all.
He dressed himself, all in a tremble with excitement, and went upon
deck.  It was pitch dark, and he could see no one, but the sound of
regular footfalls somewhere in the fore part of the ship showed that the
sentinels were still there.  The guardsman walked over to the side and
peered down into the darkness.  He could see the loom of a boat.

"Who is there?" he whispered.

"Is that you, De Catinat?

"Yes."

"We have come for you."

"God bless you, Amos."

"Is your wife there?"

"No, but I can rouse her."

"Good!  But first catch this cord.  Now pull up the ladder!"

De Catinat gripped the line which was thrown to him, and on drawing it
up found that it was attached to a rope ladder furnished at the top with
two steel hooks to catch on to the bulwarks.  He placed them in
position, and then made his way very softly to the cabin amidships in
the ladies' quarters which had been allotted to his wife.  She was the
only woman aboard the ship now, so that he was able to tap at her door
in safety, and to explain in a few words the need for haste and for
secrecy.  In ten minutes Adele had dressed, and with her valuables in a
little bundle, had slipped out from her cabin.  Together they made their
way upon deck once more, and crept aft under the shadow of the bulwarks.
They were almost there when De Catinat stopped suddenly and ground out
an oath through his clenched teeth.  Between them and the rope ladder
there was standing in a dim patch of murky light the grim figure of a
Franciscan friar.  He was peering through the darkness, his heavy cowl
shadowing his face, and he advanced slowly as if he had caught a glimpse
of them.  A lantern hung from the mizzen shrouds above him.
He unfastened it and held it up to cast its light upon them.

But De Catinat was not a man with whom it was safe to trifle.  His life
had been one of quick resolve and prompt action.  Was this vindictive
friar at the last moment to stand between him and freedom?  It was a
dangerous position to take.  The guardsman pulled Adele into the shadow
of the mast, and then, as the monk advanced, he sprang out upon him and
seized him by the gown.  As he did so the other's cowl was pushed back,
and instead of the harsh features of the ecclesiastic, De Catinat saw
with amazement in the glimmer of the lantern the shrewd gray eyes and
strong tern face of Ephraim Savage.  At the same instant another figure
appeared over the side, and the warm-hearted Frenchman threw himself
into the arms of Amos Green.

"It's all right," said the young hunter, disengaging himself with some
embarrassment from the other's embrace.

"We've got him in the boat with a buckskin glove jammed into his
gullet!"

"Who then?"

"The man whose cloak Captain Ephraim there has put round him.  He came
on us when you were away rousing your lady, but we got him to be quiet
between us.  Is the lady there?"

"Here she is."

"As quick as you can, then, for some one may come along."

Adele was helped over the side, and seated in the stern of a birch-bark
canoe.  The three men unhooked the ladder, and swung themselves down by
a rope, while two Indians, who held the paddles, pushed silently off
from the ship's side, and shot swiftly up the stream.  A minute later a
dim loom behind them, and the glimmer of two yellow lights, was all that
they could see of the _St. Christophe_.

"Take a paddle, Amos, and I'll take one," said Captain Savage, stripping
off his monk's gown.  "I felt safer in this on the deck of yon ship, but
it don't help in a boat.  I believe we might have fastened the hatches
and taken her, brass guns and all, had we been so minded."

"And been hanged as pirates at the yard-arm next morning," said Amos.
"I think we have done better to take the honey and leave the tree.
I hope, madame, that all is well with you."

"Nay, I can hardly understand what has happened, or where we are."

"Nor can I, Amos."

"Did you not expect us to come back for you, then?"

"I did not know what to expect."

"Well, now, but surely you could not think that we would leave you
without a word."

"I confess that I was cut to the heart by it."

"I feared that you were when I looked at you with the tail of my eye,
and saw you staring so blackly over the bulwarks at us.  But if we had
been seen talking or planning they would have been upon our trail at
once.  As it was they had not a thought of suspicion, save only this
fellow whom we have in the bottom of the boat here."

"And what did you do?"

"We left the brig last night, got ashore on the Beaupre side, arranged
for this canoe, and lay dark all day.  Then to-night we got alongside
and I roused you easily, for I knew where you slept.  The friar nearly
spoiled all when you were below, but we gagged him and passed him over
the side.  Ephraim popped on his gown so that he might go forward to
help you without danger, for we were scared at the delay."

"Ah! it is glorious to be free once more.  What do I not owe you, Amos?"

"Well, you looked after me when I was in your country, and I am going to
look after you now."

"And where are we going?"

"Ah! there you have me.  It is this way or none, for we can't get down
to the sea.  We must make our way over land as best we can, and we must
leave a good stretch between Quebec citadel and us before the day
breaks, for from what I hear they would rather have a Huguenot prisoner
than an Iroquois sagamore.  By the eternal, I cannot see why they should
make such a fuss over how a man chooses to save his own soul, though
here is old Ephraim just as fierce upon the other side, so all the folly
is not one way."

"What are you saying about me?" asked the seaman, pricking up his ears
at the mention of his own name.

"Only that you are a good stiff old Protestant."

"Yes, thank God.  My motto is freedom to conscience, d'ye see, except
just for Quakers, and Papists, and--and I wouldn't stand Anne
Hutchinsons and women testifying, and suchlike foolishness."

Amos Green laughed.  "The Almighty seems to pass it over, so why should
you take it to heart?" said he.

"Ah, you're young and callow yet.  You'll live to know better.  Why, I
shall hear you saying a good word soon even for such unclean spawn as
this," prodding the prostrate friar with the handle of his paddle.

"I daresay he's a good man, accordin' to his lights."

"And I daresay a shark is a good fish accordin' to its lights.  No, lad,
you won't mix up light and dark for me in that sort of fashion.  You may
talk until you unship your jaw, d'ye see, but you will never talk a foul
wind into a fair one.  Pass over the pouch and the tinder-box, and maybe
our friend here will take a turn at my paddle."

All night they toiled up the great river, straining every nerve to place
themselves beyond the reach of pursuit.  By keeping well into the
southern bank, and so avoiding the force of the current, they sped
swiftly along, for both Amos and De Catinat were practised hands with
the paddle, and the two Indians worked as though they were wire and
whipcord instead of flesh and blood.  An utter silence reigned over all
the broad stream, broken only by the lap-lap of the water against their
curving bow, the whirring of the night hawk above them, and the sharp
high barking of foxes away in the woods.  When at last morning broke,
and the black shaded imperceptibly into gray, they were far out of sight
of the citadel and of all trace of man's handiwork.  Virgin woods in
their wonderful many-coloured autumn dress flowed right down to the
river edge on either side, and in the centre was a little island with a
rim of yellow sand and an out-flame of scarlet tupelo and sumach in one
bright tangle of colour in the centre.

"I've passed here before," said De Catinat.  "I remember marking that
great maple with the blaze on its trunk, when last I went with the
governor to Montreal.  That was in Frontenac's day, when the king was
first and the bishop second."

The Redskins, who had sat like terra-cotta figures, without a trace of
expression upon their set hard faces, pricked up their ears at the sound
of that name.

"My brother has spoken of the great Onontio," said one of them, glancing
round.  "We have listened to the whistling of evil birds who tell us
that he will never come back to his children across the seas."

"He is with the great white father," answered De Catinat.  "I have
myself seen him in his council, and he will assuredly come across the
great water if his people have need of him."

The Indian shook his shaven head.

"The rutting month is past, my brother," said he, speaking in broken
French, "but ere the month of the bird-laying has come there will be no
white man upon this river save only behind stone walls."

"What, then?  We have heard little!  Have the Iroquois broken out so
fiercely?"

"My brother, they said they would eat up the Hurons, and where are the
Hurons now?  They turned their faces upon the Eries, and where are the
Eries now?  They went westward against the Illinois, and who can find an
Illinois village?  They raised the hatchet against the Andastes, and
their name is blotted from the earth.  And now they have danced a dance
and sung a song which will bring little good to my white brothers."

"Where are they, then?"

The Indian waved his hand along the whole southern and western horizon.

"Where are they not?  The woods are rustling with them.  They are like a
fire among dry grass, so swift and so terrible!"

"On my life," said De Catinat, "if these devils are indeed unchained,
they will need old Frontenac back if they are not to be swept into the
river."

"Ay," said Amos, "I saw him once, when I was brought before him with the
others for trading on what he called French ground.  His mouth set like
a skunk trap and he looked at us as if he would have liked our scalps
for his leggings.  But I could see that he was a chief and a brave man."

"He was an enemy of the Church, and the right hand of the foul fiend in
this country," said a voice from the bottom of the canoe.

It was the friar who had succeeded in getting rid of the buckskin glove
and belt with which the two Americans had gagged him.  He was lying
huddled up now glaring savagely at the party with his fiery dark eyes.

"His jaw-tackle has come adrift," said the seaman.  "Let me brace it up
again."

"Nay, why should we take him farther?" asked Amos.  "He is but weight
for us to carry, and I cannot see that we profit by his company.  Let us
put him out."

"Ay, sink or swim," cried old Ephraim with enthusiasm.

"Nay, upon the bank."

"And have him maybe in front of us warning the black jackets."

"On that island, then."

"Very good.  He can hail the first of his folk who pass."

They shot over to the island and landed the friar, who said nothing, but
cursed them with his eye.  They left with him a small supply of biscuit
and of flour to last him until he should be picked up.  Then, having
passed a bend in the river, they ran their canoe ashore in a little cove
where the whortleberry and cranberry bushes grew right down to the
water's edge, and the sward was bright with the white euphorbia, the
blue gentian, and the purple balm.  There they laid out their small
stock of provisions, and ate a hearty breakfast while discussing what
their plans should be for the future.



CHAPTER XXX.


THE INLAND WATERS.

They were not badly provided for their journey.  The captain of the
Gloucester brig in which the Americans had started from Quebec knew
Ephraim Savage well, as who did not upon the New England coast?  He had
accepted his bill therefore at three months' date, at as high a rate of
interest as he could screw out of him, and he had let him have in return
three excellent guns, a good supply of ammunition, and enough money to
provide for all his wants.  In this way he had hired the canoe and the
Indians, and had fitted her with meat and biscuit to last them for ten
days at the least.

"It's like the breath of life to me to feel the heft of a gun and to
smell the trees round me," said Amos.  "Why, it cannot be more than a
hundred leagues from here to Albany or Schenectady, right through the
forest."

"Ay, lad, but how is the gal to walk a hundred leagues through a forest?
No, no, let us keep water under our keel, and lean on the Lord."

"Then there is only one way for it.  We must make the Richelieu River,
and keep right along to Lake Champlain and Lake St. Sacrament.  There we
should be close by the headwaters of the Hudson."

"It is a dangerous road," said De Catinat, who understood the
conversation of his companions, even when he was unable to join in it.
"We should need to skirt the country of the Mohawks."

"It's the only way, I guess.  It's that or nothing."

"And I have a friend upon the Richelieu River who, I am sure, would help
us on our way," said De Catinat with a smile.  "Adele, you have heard me
talk of Charles de la Noue, seigneur de Sainte Marie?"

"He whom you used to call the Canadian duke, Amory?"

"Precisely.  His seigneury lies on the Richelieu, a little south of Fort
St. Louis, and I am sure that he would speed us upon our way."

"Good!" cried Amos.  "If we have a friend there we shall do well.
That clenches it then, and we shall hold fast by the river.  Let's get
to our paddles then, for that friar will make mischief for us if he
can."

And so for a long week the little party toiled up the great waterway,
keeping ever to the southern bank, where there were fewer clearings.
On both sides of the stream the woods were thick, but every here and
there they would curve away, and a narrow strip of cultivated land would
skirt the bank, with the yellow stubble to mark where the wheat had
grown.  Adele looked with interest at the wooden houses with their
jutting stories and quaint gable-ends, at the solid, stone-built
manor-houses of the seigneurs, and at the mills in every hamlet, which
served the double purpose of grinding flour and of a loop-holed place of
retreat in case of attack.  Horrible experience had taught the Canadians
what the English settlers had yet to learn, that in a land of savages it
is a folly to place isolated farmhouses in the centre of their own
fields.  The clearings then radiated out from the villages, and every
cottage was built with an eye to the military necessities of the whole,
so that the defence might make a stand at all points, and might finally
centre upon the stone manor-house and the mill.  Now at every bluff and
hill near the villages might be seen the gleam of the muskets of the
watchers, for it was known that the scalping parties of the Five Nations
were out, and none could tell where the blow would fall, save that it
must come where they were least prepared to meet it.

Indeed, at every step in this country, whether the traveller were on the
St. Lawrence, or west upon the lakes, or down upon the banks of the
Mississippi, or south in the country of the Cherokees and of the Creeks,
he would still find the inhabitants in the same state of dreadful
expectancy, and from the same cause.  The Iroquois, as they were named
by the French, or the Five Nations as they called themselves, hung like
a cloud over the whole great continent.  Their confederation was a
natural one, for they were of the same stock and spoke the same
language, and all attempts to separate them had been in vain.  Mohawks,
Cayugas, Onondagas, Oneidas, and Senecas were each proud of their own
totems and their own chiefs, but in war they were Iroquois, and the
enemy of one was the enemy of all.  Their numbers were small, for they
were never able to put two thousand warriors in the field, and their
country was limited, for their villages were scattered over the tract
which lies between Lake Champlain and Lake Ontario.  But they were
united, they were cunning, they were desperately brave, and they were
fiercely aggressive and energetic.  Holding a central position, they
struck out upon each side in turn, never content with simply defeating
an adversary, but absolutely annihilating and destroying him, while
holding all the others in check by their diplomacy.  War was their
business, and cruelty their amusement.  One by one they had turned their
arms against the various nations, until, for a space of over a thousand
square miles, none existed save by sufferance.  They had swept away
Hurons and Huron missions in one fearful massacre.  They had destroyed
the tribes of the north-west, until even the distant Sacs and Foxes
trembled at their name.  They had scoured the whole country to westward
until their scalping parties had come into touch with their kinsmen the
Sioux, who were lords of the great plains, even as they were of the
great forests.  The New England Indians in the east, and the Shawnees
and Delawares farther south, paid tribute to them, and the terror of
their arms had extended over the borders of Maryland and Virginia.
Never, perhaps, in the world's history has so small a body of men
dominated so large a district and for so long a time.

For half a century these tribes had nursed a grudge wards the French
since Champlain and some of his followers had taken part with their
enemies against them.  During all these years they had brooded in their
forest villages, flashing out now and again in some border outrage, but
waiting for the most part until their chance should come.  And now it
seemed to them that it had come.  They had destroyed all the tribes who
might have allied themselves with the white men.  They had isolated
them.  They had supplied themselves with good guns and plenty of
ammunition from the Dutch and English of New York.  The long thin line
of French settlements lay naked before them.  They were gathered in the
woods, like hounds in leash, waiting for the orders of their chiefs,
which should precipitate them with torch and with tomahawk upon the belt
of villages.

Such was the situation as the little party of refugees paddled along the
bank of the river, seeking the only path which could lead them to peace
and to freedom.  Yet it was, as they well knew, a dangerous road to
follow.  All down the Richelieu River were the outposts and blockhouses
of the French, for when the feudal system was grafted upon Canada the
various seigneurs or native _noblesse_ were assigned their estates in
the positions which would be of most benefit to the settlement.  Each
seigneur with his tenants under him, trained as they were in the use of
arms, formed a military force exactly as they had done in the middle
ages, the farmer holding his fief upon condition that he mustered when
called upon to do so.  Hence the old officers of the regiment of
Carignan, and the more hardy of the settlers, had been placed along the
line of the Richelieu, which runs at right angles to the St. Lawrence
towards the Mohawk country.  The blockhouses themselves might hold their
own, but to the little party who had to travel down from one to the
other the situation was full of deadly peril.  It was true that the
Iroquois were not at war with the English, but they would discriminate
little when on the warpath, and the Americans, even had they wished to
do so, could not separate their fate from that of their two French
companions.

As they ascended the St. Lawrence they met many canoes coming down.
Sometimes it was an officer or an official on his way to the capital
from Three Rivers or Montreal, sometimes it was a load of skins, with
Indians or _coureurs-de-bois_ conveying them down to be shipped to
Europe, and sometimes it was a small canoe which bore a sunburned
grizzly-haired man, with rusty weather-stained black cassock, who
zigzagged from bank to bank, stopping at every Indian hut upon his way.
If aught were amiss with the Church in Canada the fault lay not with men
like these village priests, who toiled and worked and spent their very
lives in bearing comfort and hope, and a little touch of refinement too,
through all those wilds.  More than once these wayfarers wished to have
speech with the fugitives, but they pushed onwards, disregarding their
signs and hails.  From below nothing overtook them, for they paddled
from early morning until late at night, drawing up the canoe when they
halted, and building a fire of dry wood, for already the nip of the
coming winter was in the air.

It was not only the people and their dwellings which were stretched out
before the wondering eyes of the French girl as she sat day after day in
the stern of the canoe.  Her husband and Amos Green taught her also to
take notice of the sights of the woodlands, and as they skirted the
bank, they pointed out a thousand things which her own senses would
never have discerned.  Sometimes it was the furry face of a raccoon
peeping out from some tree-cleft, or an otter swimming under the
overhanging brushwood with the gleam of a white fish in its mouth.
Or, perhaps, it was the wild cat crouching along a branch with its
wicked yellow eyes fixed upon the squirrels which played at the farther
end, or else with a scuttle and rush the Canadian porcupine would thrust
its way among the yellow blossoms of the resin weed and the tangle of
the whortleberry bushes.  She learned, too, to recognise the pert sharp
cry of the tiny chick-a-dee, the call of the blue-bird, and the flash of
its wings amid the foliage, the sweet chirpy note of the black and white
bobolink, and the long-drawn mewing of the cat-bird.  On the breast of
the broad blue river, with Nature's sweet concert ever sounding from the
bank, and with every colour that artist could devise spread out before
her eyes on the foliage of the dying woods, the smile came back to her
lips, and her cheeks took a glow of health which France had never been
able to give.  De Catinat saw the change in her, but her presence
weighed him down with fear, for he knew that while Nature had made these
woods a heaven, man had changed it into a hell, and that a nameless
horror lurked behind all the beauty of the fading leaves and of the
woodland flowers.  Often as he lay at night beside the smouldering fire
upon his couch of spruce, and looked at the little figure muffled in the
blanket and slumbering peacefully by his side, he felt that he had no
right to expose her to such peril, and that in the morning they should
turn the canoe eastward again and take what fate might bring them at
Quebec.  But ever with the daybreak there came the thought of the
humiliation, the dreary homeward voyage, the separation which would
await them in galley and dungeon, to turn him from his purpose.

On the seventh day they rested at a point but a few miles from the mouth
of the Richelieu River, where a large blockhouse, Fort Richelieu, had
been built by M. de Saurel.  Once past this they had no great distance
to go to reach the seigneury of De Catinat's friend of the _noblesse_
who would help them upon their way.  They had spent the night upon a
little island in midstream, and at early dawn they were about to thrust
the canoe out again from the sand-lined cove in which she lay, when
Ephraim Savage growled in his throat and pointed Out across the water.

A large canoe was coming up the river, flying along as quick as a dozen
arms could drive it.  In the stern sat a dark figure which bent forward
with every swing of the paddles, as though consumed by eagerness to push
onwards.  Even at that distance there was no mistaking it.  It was the
fanatical monk whom they had left behind them.

Concealed among the brushwood, they watched their pursuers fly past and
vanish round a curve in the stream.  Then they looked at one another in
perplexity.

"We'd have done better either to put him overboard or to take him as
ballast," said Ephraim.  "He's hull down in front of us now, and drawing
full."

"Well, we can't take the back track anyhow," remarked Amos.

"And yet how can we go on?" said De Catinat despondently.  "This
vindictive devil will give word at the fort and at every other point
along the river.  He has been back to Quebec.  It is one of the
governor's own canoes, and goes three paces to our two."

"Let me cipher it out."  Amos Green sat on a fallen maple with his head
sunk upon his hands.  "Well," said he presently, "if it's no good going
on, and no good going back, there's only one way, and that is to go to
one side.  That's so, Ephraim, is it not?"

"Ay, ay, lad, if you can't run you must tack, but it seems shoal water
on either bow."

"We can't go to the north, so it follows that we must go to the south."

"Leave the canoe?"

"It's our only chance.  We can cut through the woods and come out near
this friendly house on the Richelieu.  The friar will lose our trail
then, and we'll have no more trouble with him, if he stays on the St.
Lawrence."

"There's nothing else for it," said Captain Ephraim ruefully.  "It's not
my way to go by land if I can get by water, and I have not been a fathom
deep in a wood since King Philip came down on the province, so you must
lay the course and keep her straight, Amos."

"It is not far, and it will not take us long.  Let us get over to the
southern bank and we shall make a start.  If madame tires, De Catinat,
we shall take turns to carry her."

"Ah, monsieur, you cannot think what a good walker I am.  In this
splendid air one might go on forever."

"We will cross then."

In a very few minutes they were at the other side and had landed at the
edge of the forest.  There the guns and ammunition were allotted to each
man, and his share of the provisions and of the scanty baggage.  Then
having paid the Indians, and having instructed them to say nothing of
their movements, they turned their backs upon the river and plunged into
the silent woods.



CHAPTER XXXI.


THE HAIRLESS MAN.

All day they pushed on through the woodlands, walking in single file,
Amos Green first, then the seaman, then the lady, and De Catinat
bringing up the rear.  The young woodsman advanced cautiously, seeing
and hearing much that was lost to his companions, stopping continually
and examining the signs of leaf and moss and twig.  Their route lay for
the most part through open glades amid a huge pine forest, with a green
sward beneath their feet, made beautiful by the white euphorbia, the
golden rod, and the purple aster.  Sometimes, however, the great trunks
closed in upon them, and they had to grope their way in a dim twilight,
or push a path through the tangled brushwood of green sassafras or
scarlet sumach.  And then again the woods would shred suddenly away in
front of them, and they would skirt marshes, overgrown with wild rice
and dotted with little dark clumps of alder bushes, or make their way
past silent woodland lakes, all streaked and barred with the tree
shadows which threw their crimsons and clarets and bronzes upon the
fringe of the deep blue sheet of water.  There were streams, too, some
clear and rippling where the trout flashed and the king-fisher gleamed,
others dark and poisonous from the tamarack swamps, where the wanderers
had to wade over their knees and carry Adele in their arms.  So all day
they journeyed 'mid the great forests, with never a hint or token of
their fellow-man.

But if man were absent, there was at least no want of life.  It buzzed
and chirped and chattered all round them from marsh and stream and
brushwood.  Sometimes it was the dun coat of a deer which glanced
between the distant trunks, sometimes the badger which scuttled for its
hole at their approach.  Once the long in-toed track of a bear lay
marked in the soft earth before them, and once Amos picked a great horn
from amid the bushes which some moose had shed the month before.
Little red squirrels danced and clattered above their heads, and every
oak was a choir with a hundred tiny voices piping from the shadow of its
foliage.  As they passed the lakes the heavy gray stork flapped up in
front of them, and they saw the wild duck whirring off in a long V
against the blue sky, or heard the quavering cry of the loon from amid
the reeds.

That night they slept in the woods, Amos Green lighting a dry wood fire
in a thick copse where at a dozen paces it was invisible.  A few drops
of rain had fallen, so with the quick skill of the practised woodsman he
made two little sheds of elm and basswood bark, one to shelter the two
refugees, and the other for Ephraim and himself.  He had shot a wild
goose, and this, with the remains of their biscuit, served them both for
supper and for breakfast.  Next day at noon they passed a little
clearing, in the centre of which were the charred embers of a fire.
Amos spent half an hour in reading all that sticks and ground could tell
him.  Then, as they resumed their way, he explained to his companions
that the fire had been lit three weeks before, that a white man and two
Indians had camped there, that they had been journeying from west to
east, and that one of the Indians had been a squaw.  No other traces of
their fellow-mortals did they come across, until late in the afternoon
Amos halted suddenly in the heart of a thick grove, and raised his hand
to his ear.

"Listen!" he cried.

"I hear nothing," said Ephraim.

"Nor I," added De Catinat.

"Ah, but I do!" cried Adele gleefully.  "It is a bell--and at the very
time of day when the bells all sound in Paris!"

"You are right, madame.  It is what they call the Angelus bell."

"Ah, yes, I hear it now!" cried De Catinat.  "It was drowned by the
chirping of the birds.  But whence comes a bell in the heart of a
Canadian forest?"

"We are near the settlements on the Richelieu.  It must be the bell of
the chapel at the fort."

"Fort St. Louis!  Ah, then, we are no great way from my friend's
seigneury."

"Then we may sleep there to-night, if you think that he is indeed to be
trusted."

"Yes.  He is a strange man, with ways of his own, but I would trust him
with my life."

"Very good.  We shall keep to the south of the fort and make for his
house.  But something is putting up the birds over yonder.  Ah, I hear
the sound of steps!  Crouch down here among the sumach, until we see who
it is who walks so boldly through the woods."

They stooped all four among the brushwood, peeping out between the tree
trunks at a little glade towards which Amos was looking.  For a long
time the sound which the quick ears of the woodsman had detected was
inaudible to the others, but at last they too heard the sharp snapping
of twigs as some one forced his passage through the undergrowth.
A moment later a man pushed his way into the open, whose appearance was
so strange and so ill-suited to the spot, that even Amos gazed upon him
with amazement.

He was a very small man, so dark and weather-stained that he might have
passed for an Indian were it not that he walked and was clad as no
Indian had ever been.  He wore a broad-brimmed hat, frayed at the edges,
and so discoloured that it was hard to say what its original tint had
been.  His dress was of skins, rudely cut and dangling loosely from his
body, and he wore the high boots of a dragoon, as tattered and stained
as the rest of his raiment.  On his back he bore a huge bundle of canvas
with two long sticks projecting from it, and under each arm he carried
what appeared to be a large square painting.

"He's no Injun," whispered Amos, "and he's no Woodsman either.
Blessed if I ever saw the match of him!"

"He's neither _voyageur_, nor soldier, nor _coureur-de-bois_," said De
Catinat.

"'Pears to me to have a jurymast rigged upon his back, and fore and main
staysails set under each of his arms," said Captain Ephraim.

"Well, he seems to have no consorts, so we may hail him without fear."

They rose from their ambush, and as they did so the stranger caught
sight of them.  Instead of showing the uneasiness which any man might be
expected to feel at suddenly finding himself in the presence of
strangers in such a country, he promptly altered his course and came
towards them.  As he crossed the glade, however, the sounds of the
distant bell fell upon his ears, and he instantly whipped off his hat
and sunk his head in prayer.  A cry of horror rose, not only from Adele
but from everyone of the party, at the sight which met their eyes.

The top of the man's head was gone.  Not a vestige of hair or of white
skin remained, but in place of it was a dreadful crinkled discoloured
surface with a sharp red line running across his brow and round over his
ears.

"By the eternal!" cried Amos, "the man has lost his scalp!"

"My God!" said De Catinat.  "Look at his hands!"

He had raised them in prayer.  Two or three little stumps projecting
upwards showed where the fingers had been.

"I've seen some queer figure-heads in my life, but never one like that,"
said Captain Ephraim.

It was indeed a most extraordinary face which confronted them as they
advanced.  It was that of a man who might have been of any age and of
any nation, for the features were so distorted that nothing could be
learned from them.  One eyelid was drooping with a puckering and
flatness which showed that the ball was gone.  The other, however, shot
as bright and merry and kindly a glance as ever came from a chosen
favourite of fortune.  His face was flecked over with peculiar brown
spots which had a most hideous appearance, and his nose had been burst
and shattered by some terrific blow.  And yet, in spite of this dreadful
appearance, there was something so noble in the carriage of the man, in
the pose of his head and in the expression which still hung, like the
scent from a crushed flower, round his distorted features, that even the
blunt Puritan seaman was awed by it.

"Good-evening, my children," said the stranger, picking up his pictures
again and advancing towards them.  "I presume that you are from the
fort, though I may be permitted to observe that the woods are not very
safe for ladies at present."

"We are going to the manor-house of Charles de la Noue at Sainte Marie,"
said De Catinat, "and we hope soon to be in a place of safety.  But I
grieve, sir, to see how terribly you have been mishandled."

"Ah, you have observed my little injuries, then!  They know no better,
poor souls.  They are but mischievous children--merry-hearted but
mischievous.  Tut, tut, it is laughable indeed that a man's vile body
should ever clog his spirit, and yet here am I full of the will to push
forward, and yet I must even seat myself on this log and rest myself,
for the rogues have blown the calves of my legs off."

"My God!  Blown them off!  The devils!"

"Ah, but they are not to be blamed.  No, no, it would be uncharitable to
blame them.  They are ignorant poor folk, and the prince of darkness is
behind them to urge them on.  They sank little charges of powder into my
legs and then they exploded them, which makes me a slower walker than
ever, though I was never very brisk.  'The Snail' was what I was called
at school in Tours, yes, and afterwards at the seminary I was always
'the Snail.'"

"Who are you then, sir, and who is it who has used you so shamefully?"
asked De Catinat.

"Oh, I am a very humble person.  I am Ignatius Morat, of the Society of
Jesus, and as to the people who have used me a little roughly, why, if
you are sent upon the Iroquois mission, of course you know what to
expect.  I have nothing at all to complain of.  Why, they have used me
very much better than they did Father Jogues, Father Breboeuf, and a
good many others whom I could mention.  There were times, it is true,
when I was quite hopeful of martyrdom, especially when they thought my
tonsure was too small, which was their merry way of putting it.  But I
suppose I was not worthy of it; indeed I know that I was not, so it only
ended in just a little roughness."

"Where are you going then?" asked Amos, who had listened in amazement to
the man's words.

"I am going to Quebec.  You see I am such a useless person that, until I
have seen the bishop, I can really do no good at all."

"You mean that you will resign your mission into the bishop's hands?"
said De Catinat.

"Oh, no.  That would be quite the sort of thing which I should do if I
were left to myself, for it is incredible how cowardly I am.  You would
not think it possible that a priest of God could be so frightened as I
am sometimes.  The mere sight of a fire makes me shrink all into myself
ever since I went through the ordeal of the lighted pine splinters,
which have left all these ugly stains upon my face.  But then, of
course, there is the Order to be thought of, and members of the Order do
not leave their posts for trifling causes.  But it is against the rules
of Holy Church that a maimed man should perform the rites, and so, until
I have seen the bishop and had his dispensation, I shall be even more
useless than ever."

"And what will you do then?"

"Oh, then, of course, I will go back to my flock."

"To the Iroquois!"

"That is where I am stationed."

"Amos," said De Catinat, "I have spent my life among brave men, but I
think that this is the bravest man that I have ever met!"

"On my word," said Amos, "I have seen some good men, too, but never one
that I thought was better than this.  You are weary, father.  Have some
of our cold goose, and there is still a drop of cognac in my flask."

"Tut, tut, my son, if I take anything but the very simplest living it
makes me so lazy that I become a snail indeed."

"But you have no gun and no food.  How do you live?"

"Oh, the good God has placed plenty of food in these forests for a
traveller who dare not eat very much.  I have had wild plums, and wild
grapes, and nuts and cranberries, and a nice little dish of
_tripe-de-mere_ from the rocks."

The woodsman made a wry face at the mention of this delicacy.

"I had as soon eat a pot of glue," said he.  "But what is this which you
carry on your back?"

"It is my church.  Ah, I have everything here, tent, altar, surplice,
everything.  I cannot venture to celebrate service myself without the
dispensation, but surely this venerable man is himself in orders and
will solemnise the most blessed function."

Amos, with a sly twinkle of the eyes, translated the proposal to
Ephraim, who stood with his huge red hands clenched, mumbling about the
saltless pottage of papacy.  De Catinat replied briefly, however, that
they were all of the laity, and that if they were to reach their
destination before nightfall, it was necessary that they should push on.

"You are right, my son," said the little Jesuit.  "These poor people
have already left their villages, and in a few days the woods will be
full of them, though I do not think that any have crossed the Richelieu
yet.  There is one thing, however, which I would have you do for me."

"And what is that?"

"It is but to remember that I have left with Father Lamberville at
Onondaga the dictionary which I have made of the Iroquois and French
languages.  There also is my account of the copper mines of the Great
Lakes which I visited two years ago, and also an orrery which I have
made to show the northern heavens with the stars of each month as they
are seen from this meridian.  If aught were to go amiss with Father
Lamberville or with me, and we do not live very long  on the Iroquois
mission, it would be well that some one  else should profit from my
work."

"I will tell my friend to-night.  But what are these great pictures,
father, and why do you bear them through the wood?"  He turned them over
as he spoke, and the whole party gathered round them, staring in
amazement.

They were very rough daubs, crudely coloured and gaudy.  In the first, a
red man was reposing serenely upon what appeared to be a range of
mountains, with a musical instrument in his hand, a crown upon his head,
and a smile upon his face.  In the second, a similar man was screaming
at the pitch of his lungs, while half-a-dozen black creatures were
battering him with poles and prodding him with lances.

"It is a damned soul and a saved soul," said Father Ignatius Morat,
looking at his pictures with some satisfaction.  "These are clouds upon
which the blessed spirit reclines, basking in all the joys of paradise.
It is well done this picture, but it has had no good effect, because
there are no beaver in it, and they have not painted in a tobacco-pipe.
You see they have little reason, these poor folk, and so we have to
teach them as best we can through their eyes and their foolish senses.
This other is better.  It has converted several squaws and more than one
Indian.  I shall not bring back the saved soul when I come in the
spring, but I shall bring five damned souls, which will be one for each
nation.  We must fight Satan with such weapons as we can get, you see.
And now, my children, if you must go, let me first call down a blessing
upon you!"

And then occurred a strange thing, for the beauty of this man's soul
shone through all the wretched clouds of sect, and, as he raised his
hand to bless them, down went those Protestant knees to earth, and even
old Ephraim found himself with a softened heart and a bent head
listening to the half-understood words of this crippled, half-blinded,
little stranger.

"Farewell, then," said he, when they had risen.  "May the sunshine of
Saint Eulalie be upon you, and may Saint Anne of Beaupre shield you at
the moment of your danger."

And so they left him, a grotesque and yet heroic figure, staggering
along through the woods with his tent, his pictures, and his mutilation.
If the Church of Rome should ever be wrecked it may come from her
weakness in high places, where all Churches are at their weakest, or it
may be because with what is very narrow she tries to explain that which
is very broad, but assuredly it will never be through the fault of her
rank and file, for never upon earth have men and women spent
themselves more lavishly and more splendidly than in her service.



CHAPTER XXXII.


THE LORD OF SAINTE MARIE.

Leaving Fort St. Louis, whence the bells had sounded, upon their right,
they pushed onwards as swiftly as they could, for the sun was so low in
the heavens that the bushes in the clearings threw shadows like trees.
Then suddenly, as they peered in front of them between the trunks, the
green of the sward turned to the blue of the water, and they saw a broad
river running swiftly before them.  In France it would have seemed a
mighty stream, but, coming fresh from the vastness of the St. Lawrence,
their eyes were used to great sheets of water.  But Amos and De Catinat
had both been upon the bosom of the Richelieu before, and their hearts
bounded as they looked upon it, for they knew that this was the straight
path which led them, the one to home, and the other to peace and
freedom.  A few days' journeying down there, a few more along the lovely
island-studded lakes of Champlain and Saint Sacrament, under the shadow
of the tree-clad Adirondacks, and they would be at the headquarters of
the Hudson, and their toils and their dangers be but a thing of gossip
for the winter evenings.

Across the river was the terrible Iroquois country, and at two points
they could see the smoke of fires curling up into the evening air.
They had the Jesuit's word for it that none of the war-parties had
crossed yet, so they followed the track which led down the eastern bank.
As they pushed onwards, however, a stern military challenge suddenly
brought them to a stand, and they saw the gleam of two musket barrels
which covered them from a thicket overlooking the path.

"We are friends," cried De Catinat.

"Whence come you, then?" asked an invisible sentinel.

"From Quebec."

"And whither are you going?"

"To visit Monsieur Charles de la Noue, seigneur of Sainte Marie."

"Very good.  It is quite safe, Du Lhut.  They have a lady with them,
too.  I greet you, madame, in the name of my father."

Two men had emerged from the bushes, one of whom might have passed as a
full-blooded Indian, had it not been for these courteous words which he
uttered in excellent French.  He was a tall slight young man, very dark,
with piercing black eyes, and a grim square relentless mouth which could
only have come with Indian descent.  His coarse flowing hair was
gathered up into a scalp-lock, and the eagle feather which he wore in it
was his only headgear.  A rude suit of fringed hide with caribou-skin
mocassins might have been the fellow to the one which Amos Green was
wearing, but the gleam of a gold chain from his belt, the sparkle of a
costly ring upon his finger, and the delicate richly-inlaid musket which
he carried, all gave a touch of grace to his equipment.  A broad band of
yellow ochre across his forehead and a tomahawk at his belt added to the
strange inconsistency of his appearance.

The other was undoubtedly a pure Frenchman, elderly, dark and wiry, with
a bristling black beard and a fierce eager face.  He, too, was clad in
hunter's dress, but he wore a gaudy striped sash round his waist, into
which a brace of long pistols had been thrust.  His buckskin tunic had
been ornamented over the front with dyed porcupine quills and Indian
bead-work, while his leggings were scarlet with a fringe of raccoon
tails hanging down from them.  Leaning upon his long brown gun he stood
watching the party, while his companion advanced towards them.

"You will excuse our precautions," said he.  "We never know what device
these rascals may adopt to entrap us.  I fear, madame, that you have had
a long and very tiring journey."

Poor Adele, who had been famed for neatness even  among housekeepers of
the Rue St. Martin, hardly dared to look down at her own stained and
tattered dress.  Fatigue and danger she had endured with a smiling face,
but her patience almost gave way at the thought of facing strangers in
this attire.

"My mother will be very glad to welcome you, and to see to every want,"
said he quickly, as though he had read her thoughts.  "But you, sir, I
have surely seen you before."

"And I you," cried the guardsman.  "My name is Amory de Catinat, once of
the regiment of Picardy.  Surely you are Achille de la Noue de Sainte
Marie, whom I remember when you came with your father to the government
_levees_ at Quebec."

"Yes, it is I," the young man answered, holding out his hand and smiling
in a somewhat constrained fashion.  "I do not wonder that you should
hesitate, for when you saw me last I was in a very different dress to
this."

De Catinat did indeed remember him as one of the band of the young
_noblesse_ who used to come up to the capital once a year, where they
inquired about the latest modes, chatted over the year-old gossip of
Versailles, and for a few weeks at least lived a life which was in
keeping with the traditions of their order.  Very different was he now,
with scalp-lock and war-paint, under the shadow of the great oaks, his
musket in his hand and his tomahawk at his belt.

"We have one life for the forest and one for the cities," said he,
"though indeed my good father will not have it so, and carries
Versailles with him wherever he goes.  You know him of old, monsieur,
and I need not explain my words.  But it is time for our relief, and so
we may guide you home."

Two men in the rude dress of Canadian _censitaires_ or farmers, but
carrying their muskets in a fashion which told De Catinat's trained
senses that they were disciplined soldiers, had suddenly appeared upon
the scene.  Young De la Noue gave them a few curt injunctions, and then
accompanied the refugees along the path.

"You may not know my friend here," said he, pointing to the other
sentinel, "but I am quite sure that his name is not unfamiliar to you.
This is Greysolon du Lhut."

Both Amos and De Catinat looked with the deepest curiosity and interest
at the famous leader of _coureurs-de-bois_, a man whose whole life had
been spent in pushing westward, ever westward, saying little, writing
nothing, but always the first wherever there was danger to meet or
difficulty to overcome.  It was not religion and it was not hope of gain
which led him away into those western wildernesses, but pure love of
nature and of adventure, with so little ambition that he had never cared
to describe his own travels, and none knew where he had been or where he
had stopped.  For years he would vanish from the settlements away into
the vast plains of the Dacotah, or into the huge wilderness of the
north-west, and then at last some day would walk back into Sault La
Marie, or any other outpost of civilisation, a little leaner, a little
browner, and as taciturn as ever.  Indians from the furthest corners of
the continent knew him as they knew their own sachem.  He could raise
tribes and bring a thousand painted cannibals to the help of the French
who spoke a tongue which none knew, and came from the shores of rivers
which no one else had visited.  The most daring French explorers, when,
after a thousand dangers, they had reached some country which they
believed to be new, were as likely as not to find Du Lhut sitting by his
camp fire there, some new squaw by his side, and his pipe between his
teeth.  Or again, when in doubt and danger, with no friends within a
thousand miles, the traveller might suddenly meet this silent man, with
one or two tattered wanderers of his own kidney, who would help him from
his peril, and then vanish as unexpectedly as he came.  Such was the man
who now walked by their sides along the bank of the Richelieu, and both
Amos and De Catinat knew that his presence there had a sinister meaning,
and that the place which Greysolon du Lhut had chosen was the place
where the danger threatened.

"What do you think of those fires over yonder, Du Lhut?" asked young De
la Noue.

The adventurer was stuffing his pipe with rank Indian tobacco, which he
pared from a plug with a scalping knife.  He glanced over at the two
little plumes of smoke which stood straight up against the red evening
sky.

"I don't like them," said he.

"They are Iroquois then?"

"Yes."

"Well, at least it proves that they are on the other side of the river."

"It proves that they are on this side."

"What!"

Du Lhut lit his pipe from a tinder paper.  "The Iroquois are on this
side," said he.  "They crossed to the south of us."

"And you never told us.  How do you know that they crossed, and why
did you not tell us?"

"I did not know until I saw the fires over yonder."

"And how did they tell you?"

"Tut, an Indian papoose could have told," said Du Lhut impatiently.
"Iroquois on the trail do nothing without an object.  They have an
object then in showing that smoke.  If their war-parties were over
yonder there would be no object.  Therefore their braves must have
crossed the river.  And they could not get over to the north without
being seen from the fort.  They have got over on the south then."

Amos nodded with intense appreciation.  "That's it!" said he, "that's
Injun ways.  I'll lay that he is right."

"Then they may be in the woods round us.  We may be in danger," cried De
la Noue.

Du Lhut nodded and sucked at his pipe.

De Catinat cast a glance round him at the grand tree trunks, the fading
foliage, the smooth sward underneath with the long evening shadows
barred across it.  How difficult it was to realise that behind all this
beauty there lurked a danger so deadly and horrible that a man alone
might well shrink from it, far less one who had the woman whom he loved
walking within hand's touch of him.  It was with a long heart-felt sigh
of relief that he saw a wall of stockade in the midst of a large
clearing in front of him, with the stone manor house rising above it.
In a line from the stockade were a dozen cottages with cedar-shingled
roofs turned up in the Norman fashion, in which dwelt the habitants
under the protection of the seigneur's chateau--a strange little graft
of the feudal system in the heart of an American forest.  Above the main
gate as they approached was a huge shield of wood with a coat of arms
painted upon it, a silver ground with a chevron ermine between three
coronets gules.  At either corner a small brass cannon peeped through an
embrasure.  As they passed the gate the guard inside closed it and
placed the huge wooden bars into position.  A little crowd of men,
women, and children were gathered round the door of the chateau, and a
man appeared to be seated on a high-backed chair upon the threshold.

"You know my father," said the young man with a shrug of his shoulders.
"He will have it that he has never left his Norman castle, and that he
is still the Seigneur de la Noue, the greatest man within a day's ride
of Rouen, and of the richest blood of Normandy.  He is now taking his
dues and his yearly oaths from his tenants, and he would not think it
becoming, if the governor himself were to visit him, to pause in the
middle of so august a ceremony.  But if it would interest you, you may
step this way and wait until he has finished.  You, madame, I will take
at once to my mother, if you will be so kind as to follow me."

The sight was, to the Americans at least, a novel one.  A triple row of
men, women, and children were standing round in a semicircle, the men
rough and sunburned, the women homely and clean, with white caps upon
their heads, the children open-mouthed and round-eyed, awed into an
unusual quiet by the reverent bearing of their elders.  In the centre,
on his high-backed carved chair, there sat an elderly man very stiff and
erect, with an exceedingly solemn face.  He was a fine figure of a man,
tall and broad, with large strong features, clean-shaven and
deeply-lined, a huge beak of a nose, and strong shaggy eyebrows which
arched right up to the great wig, which he wore full and long as it had
been worn in France in his youth.  On his wig was placed a white hat
cocked jauntily at one side with a red feather streaming round it, and
he wore a coat of cinnamon-coloured cloth with silver at the neck and
pockets, which was still very handsome, though it bore signs of having
been frayed and mended more than once.  This, with black velvet
knee-breeches and high well-polished boots, made a costume such as De
Catinat had never before seen in the wilds of Canada.

As they watched, a rude husbandman walked forwards from the crowd, and
kneeling down upon a square of carpet placed his hands between those of
the seigneur.

"Monsieur de Sainte Marie, Monsieur de Sainte Marie, Monsieur de Sainte
Marie," said he three times, "I bring you the faith and homage which I
am bound to bring you on account of my fief Herbert, which I hold as a
man of faith of your seigneury."

"Be true, my son.  Be valiant and true!" said the old nobleman solemnly,
and then with a sudden change of tone: "What in the name of the devil
has your daughter got there?"

A girl had advanced from the crowd with a large strip of bark in front
of her on which was heaped a pile of dead fish.

"It is your eleventh fish which I am bound by my oath to render to you,"
said the _censitaire_.  "There are seventy-three in the heap, and I have
caught eight hundred in the month."

"_Peste!_" cried the nobleman.  "Do you think, Andre Dubois, that I will
disorder my health by eating three-and-seventy fish in this fashion?
Do you think that I and my body-servants and my personal retainers and
the other members of my household have nothing to do but to eat your
fish?  In future, you will pay your tribute not more than five at a
time.  Where is the major-domo?  Theuriet, remove the fish to our
central store-house, and be careful that the smell does not penetrate to
the blue tapestry chamber or to my lady's suite."

A man in very shabby black livery, all stained and faded, advanced with
a large tin platter and carried off the pile of white fish.  Then, as
each of the tenants stepped forward to pay their old-world homage, they
all left some share of their industry for their lord's maintenance.
With some it was a bundle of wheat, with some a barrel of potatoes,
while others had brought skins of deer or of beaver.  All these were
carried off by the major-domo, until each had paid his tribute, and the
singular ceremony was brought to a conclusion.  As the seigneur rose,
his son, who had returned, took De Catinat by the sleeve and led him
through the throng.

"Father," said he, "this is Monsieur de Catinat, whom you may remember
some years ago at Quebec."

The seigneur bowed with much condescension, and shook the guardsman by
the hand.

"You are extremely welcome to my estates, both you and your
body-servants--"

"They are my friends, monsieur.  This is Monsieur Amos Green and Captain
Ephraim Savage.  My wife is travelling with me, but your courteous son
has kindly taken her to your lady."

"I am honoured--honoured indeed!" cried the old man, with a bow and a
flourish.  "I remember you very well, sir, for it is not so common to
meet men of quality in this country.  I remember your father also, for
he served with me at Rocroy, though he was in the Foot, and I in the Red
Dragoons of Grissot.  Your arms are a martlet in fess upon a field
azure, and now that I think of it, the second daughter of your
great-grand-father married the son of one of the La Noues of Andelys,
which is one of our cadet branches.  Kinsman, you are welcome!"
He threw his arms suddenly round De Catinat and slapped him three times
on the back.

The young guardsman was only too delighted to find himself admitted to
such an intimacy.

"I will not intrude long upon your hospitality," said he.  "We are
journeying down to Lake Champlain, and we hope in a day or two to be
ready to go on."

"A suite of rooms shall be laid at your disposal as long as you do me
the honour to remain here.  _Peste!_ It is not every day that I can open
my gates to a man with good blood in his veins!  Ah, sir, that is what I
feel most in my exile, for who is there with whom I can talk as equal to
equal?  There is the governor, the intendant, perhaps, one or two
priests, three or four officers, but how many of the _noblesse_?
Scarcely one.  They buy their titles over here as they buy their pelts,
and it is better to have a canoe-load of beaver skins than a pedigree
from Roland.  But I forget my duties.  You are weary and hungry, you and
your friends.  Come up with me to the tapestried _salon_, and we shall
see if my stewards can find anything for your refreshment.  You play
piquet, if I remember right?  Ah, my skill is leaving me, and I should
be glad to try a hand with you."

The manor-house was high and strong, built of gray stone in a framework
of wood.  The large iron-clamped door through which they entered was
pierced for musketry fire, and led into a succession of cellars and
store-houses in which the beets, carrots, potatoes, cabbages, cured
meat, dried eels, and other winter supplies were placed.  A winding
stone staircase led them through a huge kitchen, flagged and lofty, from
which branched the rooms of the servants or retainers as the old
nobleman preferred to call them.  Above this again was the principal
suite, centering in the dining-hall with its huge fireplace and rude
home-made furniture.  Rich rugs formed of bear or deer-skin were
littered thickly over the brown-stained floor, and antlered heads
bristled out from among the rows of muskets which were arranged along
the wall.  A broad rough-hewn maple table ran down the centre of this
apartment, and on this there was soon set a venison pie, a side of
calvered salmon, and a huge cranberry tart, to which the hungry
travellers did full justice.  The seigneur explained that he had already
supped, but having allowed himself to be persuaded into joining them, he
ended by eating more than Ephraim Savage, drinking more than Du Lhut,
and finally by singing a very amorous little French _chanson_ with a
tra-le-ra chorus, the words of which, fortunately for the peace of the
company, were entirely unintelligible to the Bostonian.

"Madame is taking her refection in my lady's boudoir," he remarked, when
the dishes had been removed.  "You may bring up a bottle of Frontiniac
from bin thirteen, Theuriet.  Oh, you will see, gentlemen, that even in
the wilds we have a little, a very little, which is perhaps not
altogether bad.  And so you come from Versailles, De Catinat?  It was
built since my day, but how I remember the old life of the court at St.
Germain, before Louis turned serious!  Ah, what innocent happy days they
were when Madame de Nevailles had to bar the windows of the maids of
honour to keep out the king, and we all turned out eight deep on to the
grass plot for our morning duel!  By Saint Denis, I have not quite
forgotten the trick of the wrist yet, and, old as I am, I should be none
the worse for a little breather."  He strutted in his stately fashion
over to where a rapier and dagger hung upon the wall, and began to make
passes at the door, darting in and out, warding off imaginary blows with
his poniard, and stamping his feet with little cries of "Punto! reverso!
stoccata! dritta! mandritta!" and all the jargon of the fencing schools.
Finally he rejoined them, breathing heavily and with his wig awry.

"That was our old exercise," said he.  "Doubtless you young bloods have
improved upon it, and yet it was good enough for the Spaniards at Rocroy
and at one or two other places which I could mention.  But they still
see life at the court, I understand.  There are still love passages and
blood lettings.  How has Lauzun prospered in his wooing of Mademoiselle
de Montpensier?  Was it proved that Madame de Clermont had bought a
phial from Le Vie, the poison woman, two days before the soup disagreed
so violently with monsieur?  What did the Due de Biron do when his
nephew ran away with the duchess?  Is it true that he raised his
allowance to fifty thousand livres for having done it?"  Such were the
two-year-old questions which had not been answered yet upon the banks of
the Richelieu River.  Long into the hours of the night, when his
comrades were already snoring under their blankets, De Catinat, blinking
and yawning, was still engaged in trying to satisfy the curiosity of the
old courtier, and to bring him up to date in all the most minute gossip
of Versailles.



CHAPTER XXXIII.


THE SLAYING OF BROWN MOOSE.

Two days were spent by the travellers at the seigneury of Sainte Marie,
and they would very willingly have spent longer, for the quarters were
comfortable and the welcome warm, but already the reds of autumn were
turning to brown, and they knew how suddenly the ice and snow come in
those northern lands, and how impossible it would be to finish their
journey if winter were once fairly upon them.  The old nobleman had sent
his scouts by land and by water, but there were no signs of the Iroquois
upon the eastern banks, so that it was clear that De Lhut had been
mistaken.  Over on the other side, however, the high gray plumes of
smoke still streamed up above the trees as a sign that their enemies
were not very far off.  All day from the manor-house windows and from
the stockade they could see those danger signals which reminded them
that a horrible death lurked ever at their elbow.

The refugees were rested now and refreshed, and of one mind about
pushing on.

"If the snow comes, it will be a thousand times more dangerous," said
Amos, "for we shall leave a track then that a papoose could follow."

"And why should we fear?" urged old Ephraim.

"Truly this is a desert of salt, even though it lead to the vale of
Hinnom, but we shall be borne up against these sons of Jeroboam.
Steer a straight course, lad, and jam your helm, for the pilot will see
you safe."

"And I am not frightened, Amory, and I am quite rested now," said Adele.
"We shall be so much more happy when we are in the English Provinces,
for even now, how do we know that that dreadful monk may not come with
orders to drag us back to Quebec and Paris?"

It was indeed very possible that the vindictive Franciscan, when
satisfied that they had not ascended to Montreal, or remained at Three
Rivers, might seek them on the banks of the Richelieu.  When De Catinat
thought of how he passed them in his great canoe that morning, his eager
face protruded, and his dark body swinging in time to the paddles, he
felt that the danger which his wife suggested was not only possible but
imminent.  The seigneur was his friend, but the seigneur could not
disobey the governor's orders.  A great hand, stretching all the way
from Versailles, seemed to hang over them, even here in the heart of the
virgin forest, ready to snatch them up and carry them back into
degradation and misery.  Better all the perils of the woods than that!

But the seigneur and his son, who knew nothing of their pressing reasons
for haste, were strenuous in urging De Catinat the other way, and in
this they were supported by the silent Du Lhut, whose few muttered words
were always more weighty than the longest speech, for he never spoke
save about that of which he was a master.

"You have seen my little place," said the old nobleman, with a wave of
his beruffled ring-covered hand.  "It is not what I should wish it, but
such as it is, it is most heartily yours for the winter, if you and your
comrades would honour me by remaining.  As to madame, I doubt not that
my own dame and she will find plenty to amuse and occupy them, which
reminds me, De Catinat, that you have not yet been presented.  Theuriet,
go to your mistress and inform her that I request her to be so good as
to come to us in the hall of the dais."

De Catinat was too seasoned to be easily startled, but he was somewhat
taken aback when the lady, to whom the old nobleman always referred in
terms of exaggerated respect, proved to be as like a full-blooded Indian
squaw as the hall of the dais was to a French barn.  She was dressed, it
was true, in a bodice of scarlet taffeta with a black skirt,
silver-buckled shoes, and a scented pomander ball dangling by a silver
chain from her girdle, but her face was of the colour of the bark of the
Scotch fir, while her strong nose and harsh mouth, with the two plaits
of coarse black hair which dangled down her back, left no possible doubt
as to her origin.

"Allow me to present you, Monsieur de Catinat," said the Seigneur de
Sainte Marie solemnly, "to my wife, Onega de la Noue de Sainte Marie,
chatelaine by right of marriage to this seigneury, and also to the
Chateau d'Andelys in Normandy, and to the estate of Varennes in
Provence, while retaining in her own right the hereditary chieftainship
on the distaff side of the nation of the Onondagas.  My angel, I have
been endeavouring to persuade our friends to remain with us at Sainte
Marie instead of journeying on to Lake Champlain."

"At least leave your White Lily at Sainte Marie," said the dusky
princess, speaking in excellent French, and clasping with her ruddy
fingers the ivory hand of Adele.  "We will hold her safe for you until
the ice softens, and the leaves and the partridge berries come once
more.  I know my people, monsieur, and I tell you that the woods are
full of murder, and that it is not for nothing that the leaves are the
colour of blood, for death lurks behind every tree."

De Catinat was more moved by the impressive manner of his hostess than
by any of the other warnings which he had received.  Surely she, if
anyone, must be able to read the signs of the times.

"I know not what to do!" he cried in despair.  "I must go on, and yet
how can I expose her to these perils?  I would fain stay the winter, but
you must take my word for it, sir, that it is not possible."

"Du Lhut, you know how things should be ordered," said the seigneur.
"What should you advise my friend to do, since he is so set upon getting
to the English Provinces before the winter comes?"

The dark silent pioneer stroked his beard with his hand as he pondered
over the question.

"There is but one way," said he at last, "though even in it there is
danger.  The woods are safer than the river, for the reeds are full of
_cached_ canoes.  Five leagues from here is the blockhouse of Poitou,
and fifteen miles beyond, that of Auvergne.  We will go to-morrow to
Poitou through the woods and see if all be safe.  I will go with you,
and I give you my word that if the Iroquois are there, Greysolon du Lhut
will know it.  The lady we shall leave here, and if we find that all is
safe we shall come back for her.  Then in the same fashion we shall
advance to Auvergne, and there you must wait until you hear where their
war-parties are.  It is in my mind that it will not be very long before
we know."

"What! You would part us!" cried Adele aghast.

"It is best, my sister," said Onega, passing her arm caressingly round
her.  "You cannot know the danger, but we know it, and we will not let
our White Lily run into it.  You will stay here to gladden us, while the
great chief Du Lhut, and the French soldier, your husband, and the old
warrior who seems so wary, and the other chief with limbs like the wild
deer, go forward through the woods and see that all is well before you
venture."

And so it was at last agreed, and Adele, still protesting, was consigned
to the care of the lady of Sainte Marie, while De Catinat swore that
without a pause he would return from Poitou to fetch her.  The old
nobleman and his son would fain have joined them in their adventure, but
they had their own charge to watch and the lives of many in their
keeping, while a small party were safer in the woods than a larger one
would be.  The seigneur provided them with a letter for De Lannes, the
governor of the Poitou blockhouse, and so in the early dawn the four of
them crept like shadows from the stockade-gate, amid the muttered good
wishes of the guard within, and were lost in an instant in the blackness
of the vast forest.

From La Noue to Poitou was but twelve miles down the river, but by the
woodland route where creeks were to be crossed, reed-girt lakes to be
avoided, and paths to be picked among swamps where the wild rice grew
higher than their heads, and the alder bushes lay in dense clumps before
them, the distance was more than doubled.  They walked in single file,
Du Lhut leading, with the swift silent tread of some wild creature, his
body bent forward, his gun ready in the bend of his arm, and his keen
dark eyes shooting little glances to right and left, observing
everything from the tiniest mark upon the ground or tree trunk to the
motion of every beast and bird of the brushwood.  De Catinat walked
behind, then Ephraim Savage, and then Amos, all with their weapons ready
and with every sense upon the alert.  By midday they were more than
half-way, and halted in a thicket for a scanty meal of bread and cheese,
for De Lhut would not permit them to light a fire.

"They have not come as far as this," he whispered, "and yet I am sure
that they have crossed the river.  Ah, Governor de la Barre did not know
what he did when he stirred these men up, and this good dragoon whom the
king has sent us now knows even less."

"I have seen them in peace," remarked Amos.  "I have traded to Onondaga
and to the country of the Senecas.  I know them as fine hunters and
brave men."

"They are fine hunters, but the game that they hunt best are their
fellow-men.  I have myself led their scalping parties, and I have fought
against them, and I tell you that when a general comes out from France
who hardly knows enough to get the sun behind him in a fight, he will
find that there is little credit to be gained from them.  They talk of
burning their villages!  It would be as wise to kick over the wasps'
nest, and think that you have done with the wasps.  You are from New
England, monsieur?"

"My comrade is from New England; I am from New York."

"Ah, yes.  I could see from your step and your eye that the woods were
as a home to you.  The New England man goes on the waters and he slays
the cod with more pleasure than the caribou.  Perhaps that is why his
face is so sad.  I have been on the great water, and I remember that my
face was sad also.  There is little wind, and so I think that we may
light our pipes without danger.  With a good breeze I have known a
burning pipe fetch up a scalping party from two miles' distance, but the
trees stop scent, and the Iroquois noses are less keen than the Sioux
and the Dacotah.  God help you, monsieur, if you should ever have an
Indian war.  It is bad for us, but it would be a thousand times worse
for you."

"And why?"

"Because we have fought the Indians from the first, and we have them
always in our mind when we build.  You see how along this river every
house and every hamlet supports its neighbour?  But you, by Saint Anne
of Beaupre, it made my scalp tingle when I came on your frontiers and
saw the lonely farm-houses and little clearings out in the woods with no
help for twenty leagues around.  An Indian war is a purgatory for
Canada, but it would be a hell for the English Provinces!"

"We are good friends with the Indians," said Amos.  "We do not wish to
conquer."

"Your people have a way of conquering although they say that they do not
wish to do it," remarked Du Lhut.  "Now, with us, we bang our drums, and
wave our flags, and make a stir, but no very big thing has come of it
yet.  We have never had but two great men in Canada.  One was Monsieur
de la Salle, who was shot last year by his own men down the great river,
and the other, old Frontenac, will have to come back again if New France
is not to be turned into a desert by the Five Nations.  It would
surprise me little if by this time two years the white and gold flag
flew only over the rock of Quebec.  But I see that you look at me
impatiently, Monsieur de Catinat, and I know that you count the hours
until we are back at Sainte Marie again.  Forward, then, and may the
second part of our journey be as peaceful as the first."

For an hour or more they picked their way through the woods, following
in the steps of the old French pioneer.  It was a lovely day with hardly
a cloud in the heavens, and the sun streaming down through the thick
foliage covered the shaded sward with a delicate network of gold.
Sometimes where the woods opened they came out into the pure sunlight,
but only to pass into thick glades beyond, where a single ray, here and
there, was all that could break its way through the vast leafy covering.
It would have been beautiful, these sudden transitions from light to
shade, but with the feeling of impending danger, and of a horror ever
lurking in these shadows, the mind was tinged with awe rather than
admiration.  Silently, lightly, the four men picked their steps among
the great tree trunks.

Suddenly Du Lhut dropped upon his knees and stooped his ear to the
ground.  He rose, shook his head, and walked on with a grave face,
casting quick little glances into the shadows in every direction.

"Did you hear something?" whispered Amos.

Du Lhut put his finger to his lips, and then in an instant was down
again upon his face with his ear fixed to the ground.  He sprang up with
the look of a man who has heard what he expected to hear.

"Walk on," said he quietly, "and behave exactly as you have done all
day."

"What is it, then?"

"Indians."

"In front of us?"

"No, behind us."

"What are they doing?"

"They are following us."

"How many of them?"

"Two, I think."

The friends glanced back involuntarily over their shoulders into the
dense blackness of the forest.  At one point a single broad shaft of
light slid down between two pines and cast a golden blotch upon their
track.  Save for this one vivid spot all was sombre and silent.

"Do not look round," whispered Du Lhut sharply.  "Walk on as before."

"Are they enemies?"

"They are Iroquois."

"And pursuing us?"

"No, we are now pursuing them."

"Shall we turn, then?"

"No, they would vanish like shadows,"

"How far off are they?"

"About two hundred paces, I think."

"They cannot see us, then?"

"I think not, but I cannot be sure.  They are following our trail, I
think."

"What shall we do, then?"

"Let us make a circle and get behind them."

Turning sharp to the left he led them in a long curve through the woods,
hurrying swiftly and yet silently under the darkest shadows of the
trees.  Then he turned again, and presently halted.

"This is our own track," said he.

"Ay, and two Redskins have passed over it," cried Amos, bending down,
and pointing to marks which were entirely invisible to Ephraim Savage or
De Catinat.

"A full-grown warrior and a lad on his first warpath," said Du Lhut.
"They were moving fast, you see, for you can hardly see the heel marks
of their moccasins.  They walked one behind the other.  Now let us
follow them as they followed us, and see if we have better luck."

He sped swiftly along the trail with his musket cocked in his hand, the
others following hard upon his heels, but there was no sound, and no
sign of life from the shadowy woods in front of them.  Suddenly Du Lhut
stopped and grounded his weapon.

"They are still behind us," he said.

"Still behind us?"

"Yes.  This is the point where we branched off.  They have hesitated a
moment, as you can see by their footmarks, and then they have followed
on."

"If we go round again and quicken our pace we may overtake them."

"No, they are on their guard now.  They must know that it could only be
on their account that we went back on our tracks.  Lie here behind the
fallen log and we shall see if we can catch a glimpse of them."

A great rotten trunk, all green with mould and blotched with pink and
purple fungi, lay to one side of where they stood.  Behind this the
Frenchman crouched, and his three companions followed his example,
peering through the brushwood screen in front of them.  Still the one
broad sheet of sunshine poured down between the two pines, but all else
was as dim and as silent as a vast cathedral with pillars of wood and
roof of leaf.  Not a branch that creaked, nor a twig that snapped, nor
any sound at all save the sharp barking of a fox somewhere in the heart
of the forest.  A thrill of excitement ran through the nerves of De
Catinat.  It was like one of those games of hide-and-seek which the
court used to play, when Louis was in a sportive mood, among the oaks
and yew hedges of Versailles.  But the forfeit there was a carved fan,
or a box of bonbons, and here it was death.

Ten minutes passed and there was no sign of any living thing behind
them.

"They are over in yonder thicket," whispered Du Lhut, nodding his head
towards a dense clump of brushwood, two hundred paces away.

"Have you seen them?"

"No."

"How do you know, then?"

"I saw a squirrel come from his hole in the great white beech-tree
yonder.  He scuttled back again as if something had scared him.
From his hole he can see down into that brushwood."

"Do you think that they know that we are here?"

"They cannot see us.  But they are suspicious.  They fear a trap."

"Shall we rush for the brushwood?"

"They would pick two of us off, and be gone like shadows through the
woods.  No, we had best go on our way."

"But they will follow us."

"I hardly think that they will.  We are four and they are only two, and
they know now that we are on our guard and that we can pick up a trail
as quickly as they can themselves.  Get behind these trunks where they
cannot see us.  So!  Now stoop until you are past the belt of alder
bushes.  We must push on fast now, for where there are two Iroquois
there are likely to be two hundred not very far off."

"Thank God that I did not bring Adele!" cried De Catinat.

"Yes, monsieur, it is well for a man to make a comrade of his wife, but
not on the borders of the Iroquois country, nor of any other Indian
country either."

"You do not take your own wife with you when you travel, then?" asked
the soldier.

"Yes, but I do not let her travel from village to village.  She remains
in the wigwam."

"Then you leave her behind?"

"On the contrary, she is always there to welcome me.  By Saint Anne, I
should be heavy-hearted if I came to any village between this and the
Bluffs of the Illinois, and did not find my wife waiting to greet me."

"Then she must travel before you."

Du Lhut laughed heartily, without, however, emitting a sound.

"A fresh village, a fresh wife," said he.  "But I never have more than
one in each, for it is a shame for a Frenchman to set an evil example
when the good fathers are spending their lives so freely in preaching
virtue to them.  Ah, here is the Ajidaumo Creek, where the Indians set
the sturgeon nets.  It is still seven miles  to Poitou."

"We shall be there before nightfall, then?"

"I think that we had best wait for nightfall before we make our way in.
Since the Iroquois scouts are out as far as this, it is likely that they
lie thick round Poitou, and we may find the last step the worst unless
we have a care, the more so if these two get in front of us to warn the
others." He paused a moment with slanting head and sidelong ear.
"By Saint Anne," he muttered, "we have not shaken them off.  They are
still upon our trail!"

"You hear them?"

"Yes, they are no great way from us.  They will find that they have
followed us once too often this time.  Now, I will show you a little bit
of woodcraft which may be new to you.  Slip off your moccasins,
monsieur."

De Catinat pulled off his shoes as directed, and Du Lhut did the same.

"Put them on as if they were gloves," said the pioneer, and an instant
later Ephraim Savage and Amos had their comrades' shoes upon their
hands.

"You can sling your muskets over your back.  So!  Now down on all fours,
bending yourselves double, with your hands pressing hard upon the earth.
That is excellent.  Two men can leave the trail of four!  Now come with
me, monsieur."

He flitted from tree to tree on a line which was parallel to, but a few
yards distant from, that of their comrades.  Then suddenly he crouched
behind a bush and pulled De Catinat down beside him.

"They must pass us in a few minutes," he whispered.  "Do not fire if you
can help it."  Something gleamed in Du Lhut's hand, and his comrade,
glancing down, saw that he had drawn a keen little tomahawk from his
belt.  Again the mad wild thrill ran through the soldier's blood, as he
peered through the tangled branches and waited for whatever might come
out of the dim silent aisles of tree-boles.

And suddenly he saw something move.  It flitted like a shadow from one
trunk to the other so swiftly that De Catinat could not have told
whether it were beast or human.  And then again he saw it, and yet
again, sometimes one shadow, sometimes two shadows, silent, furtive,
like the _loup-garou_ with which his nurse had scared him in his
childhood.  Then for a few moments all was still once more, and then in
an instant there crept out from among the bushes the most
terrible-looking creature that ever walked the earth, an Iroquois chief
upon the war-trail.

He was a tall powerful man, and his bristle of scalp-locks and eagle
feathers made him look a giant in the dim light, for a good eight feet
lay between his beaded moccasin and the topmost plume of his headgear.
One side of his face was painted in soot, ochre, and vermilion to
resemble a dog, and the other half as a fowl, so that the front view was
indescribably grotesque and strange.  A belt of wampum was braced round
his loin-cloth, and a dozen scalp-locks fluttered out as he moved from
the fringe of his leggings.  His head was sunk forward, his eyes gleamed
with a sinister light, and his nostrils dilated and contracted like
those of an excited animal.  His gun was thrown forward, and he crept
along with bended knees, peering, listening, pausing, hurrying on, a
breathing image of caution.  Two paces behind him walked a lad of
fourteen, clad and armed in the same fashion, but without the painted
face and without the horrid dried trophies upon the leggings.  It was
his first campaign, and already his eyes shone and his nostrils twitched
with the same lust for murder which burned within his elder.  So they
advanced, silent, terrible, creeping out of the shadows of the wood, as
their race had come out of the shadows of history, with bodies of iron
and tiger souls.

They were just abreast of the bush when something caught the eye of the
younger warrior, some displaced twig or fluttering leaf, and he paused
with suspicion in every feature.  Another instant and he had warned his
companion, but Du Lhut sprang out and buried his little hatchet in the
skull of the older warrior.  De Catinat heard a dull crash, as when an
axe splinters its way into a rotten tree, and the man fell like a log,
laughing horribly, and kicking and striking with his powerful limbs.
The younger warrior sprang like a deer over his fallen comrade and
dashed on into the wood, but an instant later there was a gunshot among
the trees in front, followed by a faint wailing cry.

"That is his death-whoop," said Du Lhut composedly.  "It was a pity to
fire, and yet it was better than letting him go."

As he spoke the two others came back, Ephraim ramming a fresh charge
into his musket.

"Who was laughing?" asked Amos.

"It was he," said Du Lhut, nodding towards the dying warrior, who lay
with his head in a horrible puddle, and his grotesque features contorted
into a fixed smile.  "It's a custom they have when they get their
death-blow.  I've known a Seneca chief laugh for six hours on end at the
torture-stake.  Ah, he's gone!"

As he spoke the Indian gave a last spasm with his hands and feet, and
lay rigid, grinning up at the slit of blue sky above him.

"He's a great chief," said Du Lhut.  "He is Brown Moose of the Mohawks,
and the other is his second son.  We have drawn first blood, but I do
not think that it will be the last, for the Iroquois do not allow their
war-chiefs to die unavenged.  He was a mighty fighter, as you may see by
looking at his neck."

He wore a peculiar necklace which seemed to De Catinat to consist of
blackened bean pods set upon a string.  As he stooped over it he saw to
his horror that they were not bean pods, but withered human fingers.

"They are all right fore-fingers," said Du Lhut, "so everyone represents
a life.  There are forty-two in all.  Eighteen are of men whom he has
slain in battle, and the other twenty-four have been taken and
tortured."

"How do you know that?"

"Because only eighteen have their nails on.  If the prisoner of an
Iroquois be alive, he begins always by biting his nails off.  You see
that they are missing from four-and-twenty."

De Catinat shuddered.  What demons were these amongst whom an evil fate
had drifted him?  And was it possible that his Adele should fall into
the hands of such fiends?  No, no, surely the good God, for whose sake
they had suffered so much, would not permit such an infamy!  And yet as
evil a fate had come upon other women as tender as Adele--upon other men
as loving as he.  What hamlet was there in Canada which had not such
stories in their record?  A vague horror seized him as he stood there.
We know more of the future than we are willing to admit, away down in
those dim recesses of the soul where there is no reason, but only
instincts and impressions.  Now some impending terror cast its cloud
over him.  The trees around, with their great protruding limbs, were
like shadowy demons thrusting out their gaunt arms to seize him.
The sweat burst from his forehead, and he leaned heavily upon his
musket.

"By Saint Eulalie," said Du Lhut, "for an old soldier you turn very
pale, monsieur, at a little bloodshed."

"I am not well.  I should be glad of a sup from your cognac bottle."

"Here it is, comrade, and welcome!  Well, I may as well have this fine
scalp that we may have something to show for our walk."  He held the
Indian's head between his knees, and in an instant, with a sweep of his
knife, had torn off the hideous dripping trophy.

"Let us go!" cried De Catinat, turning away in disgust.

"Yes, we shall go!  But I shall also have this wampum belt marked with
the totem of the Bear.  So! And the gun too.  Look at the 'London'
printed upon the lock.  Ah, Monsieur Green, Monsieur Green, it is not
hard to see where the enemies of France get their arms."

So at last they turned away, Du Lhut bearing his spoils, leaving the red
grinning figure stretched under the silent trees.  As they passed on
they caught a glimpse of the lad lying doubled up among the bushes where
he had fallen.  The pioneer walked very swiftly until he came to a
little stream which prattled down to the big river.  Here he slipped off
his boots and leggings, and waded down it with his companions for half a
mile or so.

"They will follow our tracks when they find him," said he, "but this
will throw them off, for it is only on running water that an Iroquois
can find no trace.  And now we shall lie in this clump until nightfall,
for we are little over a mile from Port Poitou, and it is dangerous to
go forward, for the ground becomes more open."

And so they remained concealed among the alders whilst the shadows
turned from short to long, and the white drifting clouds above them were
tinged with the pink of the setting sun.  Du Lhut coiled himself into a
ball with his pipe between his teeth and dropped into a light sleep,
pricking up his ears and starting at the slightest sound from the woods
around them.  The two Americans whispered together for a long time,
Ephraim telling some long story about the cruise of the brig _Industry_,
bound to Jamestown for sugar and molasses, but at last the soothing hum
of a gentle breeze through the branches lulled them off also, and they
slept.  De Catinat alone remained awake, his nerves still in a tingle
from that strange sudden shadow which had fallen upon his soul.  What
could it mean?  Not surely that Adele was in danger?  He had heard of
such warnings, but had he not left her in safety behind cannons and
stockades?  By the next evening at latest he would see her again.  As he
lay looking up through the tangle of copper leaves at the sky beyond,
his mind drifted like the clouds above him, and he was back once more in
the jutting window in the Rue St. Martin, sitting on the broad _bancal_,
with its Spanish leather covering, with the gilt wool-bale creaking
outside, and his arm round shrinking, timid Adele, she who had compared
herself to a little mouse in an old house, and who yet had courage to
stay by his side through all this wild journey.  And then again he was
back at Versailles.  Once more he saw the brown eyes of the king, the
fair bold face of De Montespan, the serene features of De Maintenon--
once more he rode on his midnight mission, was driven by the demon
coachman, and sprang with Amos upon the scaffold to rescue the most
beautiful woman in France.  So clear it was and so vivid that it was
with a start that he came suddenly to himself, and found that the night
was creeping on in an American forest, and that Du Lhut had roused
himself and was ready for a start.

"Have you been awake?" asked the pioneer.

"Yes."

"Have you heard anything?"

"Nothing but the hooting of the owl."

"It seemed to me that in my sleep I heard a gunshot in the distance."

"In your sleep?"

"Yes, I hear as well asleep as awake and remember what I hear.  But now
you must follow me close, and we shall be in the fort soon."

"You have wonderful ears, indeed," said De Catinat, as they picked their
way through the tangled wood.  "How could you hear that these men were
following us to-day?  I could make out no sound when they were within
hand-touch of us."

"I did not hear them at first."

"You saw them?"

"No, nor that either."

"Then how could you know that they were there?"

"I heard a frightened jay flutter among the trees after we were past it.
Then ten minutes later I heard the same thing.  I knew then that there
was some one on our trail, and I listened."

"_Peste!_ you are a woodsman indeed!"

"I believe that these woods are swarming with Iroquois, although we have
had the good fortune to miss them.  So great a chief as Brown Moose
would not start on the path with a small following nor for a small
object.  They must mean mischief upon the Richelieu.  You are not sorry
now that you did not bring madame?"

"I thank God for it!"

"The woods will not be safe, I fear, until the partridge berries are out
once more.  You must stay at Sainte Marie until then, unless the
seigneur can spare men to guard you."

"I had rather stay there forever than expose my wife to such devils."

"Ay, devils they are, if ever devils walked upon earth.  You winced,
monsieur, when I took Brown Moose's scalp, but when you have seen as
much of the Indians as I have done your heart will be as hardened as
mine.  And now we are on the very borders of the clearing, and the
blockhouse lies yonder among the clump of maples.  They do not keep very
good watch, for I have been expecting during these last ten minutes to
hear the _qui vive_.  You did not come as near to Sainte Marie
unchallenged, and yet De Lannes is as old a soldier as La Noue.  We can
scarce see now, but yonder, near the river, is where he exercises his
men."

"He does so now," said Amos.  "I see a dozen of them drawn up in a line
at their drill."

"No sentinels, and all the men at drill!" cried Du Lhut in contempt.
"It is as you say, however, for I can see them myself with their ranks
open, and each as stiff and straight as a pine stump.  One would think
to see them stand so still that there was not an Indian nearer than
Orange.  We shall go across to them, and by Saint Anne, I shall tell
their commander what I think of his arrangements."

Du Lhut advanced from the bushes as he spoke, and the four men crossed
the open ground in the direction of the line of men who waited silently
for them in the dim twilight.  They were within fifty paces, and yet
none of them had raised hand or voice to challenge their approach.
There was something uncanny in the silence, and a change came over Du
Lhut's face as he peered in front of him.  He craned his head round and
looked up the river.

"My God!" he screamed.  "Look at the fort!" They had cleared the clump
of trees, and the outline of the blockhouse should have shown up in
front of them.  There was no sign of it.  It was gone!



CHAPTER XXXIV.


THE MEN OF BLOOD.

So unexpected was the blow that even De Lhut, hardened from his
childhood to every shock and danger, stood shaken and dismayed.
Then, with an oath, he ran at the top of his speed towards the line of
figures, his companions following at his heels.

As they drew nearer they could see through the dusk that it was not
indeed a line.  A silent and motionless officer stood out some twenty
paces in front of his silent and motionless men.  Further, they could
see that he wore a very high and singular head-dress.  They were still
rushing forward, breathless with apprehension, when to their horror this
head-dress began to lengthen and broaden, and a great bird flapped
heavily up and dropped down again on the nearest tree-trunk.  Then they
knew that their worst fears were true, and that it was the garrison of
Poitou which stood before them.

They were lashed to low posts with willow withies, some twenty of them,
naked all, and twisted and screwed into every strange shape which an
agonised body could assume.  In front where the buzzard had perched was
the gray-headed commandant, with two cinders thrust into his sockets and
his flesh hanging from him like a beggar's rags.  Behind was the line of
men, each with his legs charred off to the knees, and his body so
haggled and scorched and burst that the willow bands alone seemed to
hold it together.  For a moment the four comrades stared in silent
horror at the dreadful group.  Then each acted as his nature bade him.
De Catinat staggered up against a tree-trunk and leaned his head upon
his arm, deadly sick.  Du Lhut fell down upon his knees and said
something to heaven, with his two clenched hands shaking up at the
darkening sky.  Ephraim Savage examined the priming of his gun with a
tightened lip and a gleaming eye, while Amos Green, without a word,
began to cast round in circles in search of a trail.

But Du Lhut was on his feet again in a moment, and running up and down
like a sleuth-hound, noting a hundred things which even Amos would have
overlooked.  He circled round the bodies again and again.  Then he ran a
little way towards the edge of the woods, and then came back to the
charred ruins of the blockhouse, from some of which a thin reek of smoke
was still rising.

"There is no sign of the women and children," said he.

"My God!  There were women and children?"

"They are keeping the children to burn at their leisure in their
villages.  The women they may torture or may adopt as the humour takes
them.  But what does the old man want?"

"I want you to ask him, Amos," said the seaman, "why we are yawing and
tacking here when we should be cracking on all sail to stand after
them?"

Du Lhut smiled and shook his head.  "Your friend is a brave man," said
he, "if he thinks that with four men we can follow a hundred and fifty."

"Tell him, Amos, that the Lord will bear us up," said the other
excitedly.  "Say that He will be with us against the children of
Jeroboam, and we will cut them off utterly, and they shall be destroyed.
What is the French for 'slay and spare not'?  I had as soon go about
with my jaw braced up, as with folk who cannot understand a plain
language."

But Du Lhut waved aside the seaman's suggestions.  "We must have a care
now," said he, "or we shall lose our own scalps, and be the cause of
those at Sainte Marie losing theirs as well."

"Sainte Marie!" cried De Catinat.  "Is there then danger at Sainte
Marie?"

"Ay, they are in the wolf's mouth now.  This business was done last
night.  The place was stormed by a war-party of a hundred and fifty men.
This morning they left and went north upon foot.  They have been
_cached_ among the woods all day between Poitou and  Sainte Marie."

"Then we have come through them?"

"Yes, we have come through them.  They would keep their camp to-day and
send out scouts.  Brown Moose and his son were among them and struck our
trail.  To-night--"

"To-night they will attack Sainte Marie?"

"It is possible.  And yet with so small a party I should scarce have
thought that they would have dared.  Well, we can but hasten back as
quickly as we can, and give them warning of what is hanging over them."

And so they turned for their weary backward journey, though their minds
were too full to spare a thought upon the leagues which lay behind them
or those which were before.  Old Ephraim, less accustomed to walking
than his younger comrades, was already limping and footsore, but, for
all his age, he was as tough as hickory, and full of endurance.  Du Lhut
took the lead again and they turned their faces once more towards the
north.

The moon was shining brightly in the sky, but it was little aid to the
travellers in the depths of the forest.  Where it had been shadowy in
the daytime it was now so absolutely dark that De Catinat could not see
the tree-trunks against which he brushed.  Here and there they came upon
an open glade bathed in the moonshine, or perhaps a thin shaft of silver
light broke through between the branches, and cast a great white patch
upon the ground, but Du Lhut preferred to avoid these more open spaces,
and to skirt the glades rather than to cross them.  The breeze had
freshened a little, and the whole air was filled with the rustle and
sough of the leaves.  Save for this dull never-ceasing sound all would
have been silent had not the owl hooted sometimes from among the
tree-tops, and the night-jar whirred above their heads.

Dark as it was, Du Lhut walked as swiftly as during the sunlight, and
never hesitated about the track.  His comrades could see, however, that
he was taking them a different way to that which they had gone in the
morning, for twice they caught a sight of the glimmer of the broad river
upon their left, while before they had only seen the streams which
flowed into it.  On the second occasion he pointed to where, on the
farther side, they could see dark shadows flitting over the water.

"Iroquois canoes," he whispered.  "There are ten of them with eight men
in each.  They are another party, and they are also going north."

"How do you know that they are another party?"

"Because we have crossed the trail of the first within the hour."

De Catinat was filled with amazement at this marvellous man who could
hear in his sleep and could detect a trail when the very tree-trunks
were invisible to ordinary eyes.  Du Lhut halted a little to watch the
canoes, and then turned his back to the river, and plunged into the
woods once more.  They had gone a mile or two when suddenly he came to a
dead stop, snuffing at the air like a hound on a scent.

"I smell burning wood," said he.  "There is a fire within a mile of us
in that direction."

"I smell it too," said Amos.  "Let us creep up that way and see their
camp."

"Be careful, then," whispered Du Lhut, "for your lives may hang from a
cracking twig."

They advanced very slowly and cautiously until suddenly the red flare of
a leaping fire twinkled between the distant trunks.  Still slipping
through the brushwood, they worked round until they had found a point
from which they could see without a risk of being seen.

A great blaze of dry logs crackled and spurtled in the centre of a small
clearing.  The ruddy flames roared upwards, and the smoke spread out
above it until it looked like a strange tree with gray foliage and trunk
of fire.  But no living being was in sight and the huge fire roared and
swayed in absolute solitude in the midst of the silent woodlands.
Nearer they crept and nearer, but there was no movement save the rush of
the flames, and no sound but the snapping of the sticks.

"Shall we go up to it?" whispered De Catinat.  The wary old pioneer
shook his head.  "It may be a trap," said he.

"Or an abandoned camp?"

"No, it has not been lit more than an hour."

"Besides, it is far too great for a camp fire," said Amos.

"What do you make of it?" asked Du Lhut.

"A signal."

"Yes, I daresay that you are right.  This light is not a safe neighbour,
so we shall edge away from it and then make a straight line for Sainte
Marie."

The flames were soon but a twinkling point behind them, and at last
vanished behind the trees.  Du Lhut pushed on rapidly until they came to
the edge of a moonlit clearing.  He was about to skirt this, as he had
done others, when suddenly he caught De Catinat by the shoulder and
pushed him down behind a clump of sumach, while Amos did the same with
Ephraim  Savage.

A man was walking down the other side of the open space.  He had just
emerged, and was crossing it diagonally, making in the direction of the
river.  His body was bent double, but as he came out from the shadow of
the trees they could see that he was an Indian brave in full war-paint,
with leggings, loin-cloth, and musket.  Close at his heels came a
second, and then a third and a fourth, on and on until it seemed as if
the wood were full of men, and that the line would never come to an end.
They flitted past like shadows in the moonlight, in absolute silence,
all crouching and running in the same swift stealthy fashion.  Last of
all came a man in the fringed tunic of a hunter, with a cap and feather
upon his head.  He passed across like the others, and they vanished into
the shadows as silently as they had appeared.  It was five minutes
before Du Lhut thought it safe to rise from their shelter.

"By Saint Anne," he whispered, "did you count them?"

"Three hundred and ninety-six," said Amos.

"I made it four hundred and two."

"And you thought that there were only a hundred and fifty of them!"
cried De Catinat.

"Ah, you do not understand.  This is a fresh band.  The others who took
the blockhouse must be over there, for their trail lies between us and
the river."

"They could not be the same," said Amos, "for there was not a fresh
scalp among them."

Du Lhut gave the young hunter a glance of approval.  "On my word," said
he, "I did not know that your woodsmen are as good as they seem to be.
You have eyes, monsieur, and it may please you some day to remember that
Greysolon du Lhut told you so."

Amos felt a flush of pride at these words from a man whose name was
honoured wherever trader or trapper smoked round a camp fire.  He was
about to make some answer when a dreadful cry broke suddenly out of the
woods, a horrible screech, as from some one who was goaded to the very
last pitch of human misery.  Again and again, as they stood with
blanched cheeks in the darkness, they heard that awful cry swelling up
from the night and ringing drearily through the forest.

"They are torturing the women," said Du Lhut.

"Their camp lies over there."

"Can we do nothing to aid them?" cried Amos.

"Ay, ay, lad," said the captain in English.  "We can't pass distress
signals without going out of our course.  Let us put about and run down
yonder."

"In that camp," said Du Lhut slowly, "there are now nearly six hundred
warriors.  We are four.  What you say has no sense.  Unless we warn them
at Sainte Marie, these devils will lay some trap for them.  Their
parties are assembling by land and by water, and there may be a thousand
before daybreak.  Our duty is to push on and give our warning."

"He speaks the truth," said Amos to Ephraim.  "Nay, but you must not go
alone!"  He seized the stout old seaman by the arm and held him by main
force to prevent him from breaking off through the woods.

"There is one thing which we can do to spoil their night's amusement,"
said Du Lhut.  "The woods are as dry as powder, and there has been no
drop of rain for a long three months."

"Yes?"

"And the wind blows straight for their camp, with the river on the other
side of it."

"We should fire the woods!"

"We cannot do better."

In an instant Du Lhut had scraped together a little bundle of dry twigs,
and had heaped them up against a withered beech tree which was as dry as
tinder.  A stroke of flint and steel was enough to start a little
smoulder of flame, which lengthened and spread until it was leaping
along the white strips of hanging bark.  A quarter of a mile farther on
Du Lhut did the same again, and once more beyond that, until at three
different points the forest was in a blaze.  As they hurried onwards
they could hear the dull roaring of the flames behind them, and at last,
as they neared Sainte Marie, they could see, looking back, the long
rolling wave of fire travelling ever westward towards the Richelieu, and
flashing up into great spouts of flame as it licked up a clump of pines
as if it were a bundle of faggots.  Du Lhut chuckled in his silent way
as he looked back at the long orange glare in the sky.

"They will need to swim for it, some of them," said he.  "They have not
canoes to take them all off.  Ah, if I had but two hundred of my
_coureurs-de-bois_ on the river at the farther side of them not one
would have got away."

"They had one who was dressed like a white man," remarked Amos.

"Ay, and the most deadly of the lot.  His father was a Dutch trader, his
mother an Iroquois, and he goes by the name of the Flemish Bastard.  Ah,
I know him well, and I tell you that if they want a king in hell, they
will find one all ready in his wigwam.  By Saint Anne, I have a score to
settle with him, and I may pay it before this business is over.
Well, there are the lights of Sainte Marie shining down below there.
I can understand that sigh of relief, monsieur, for, on my word, after
what we found at Poitou, I was uneasy myself until I should see them."



CHAPTER XXXV.


THE TAPPING OF DEATH.

Day was just breaking as the four comrades entered the gate of the
stockade, but early as it was the _censitaires_ and their families were
all afoot staring at the prodigious fire which raged to the south of
them.  De Catinat burst through the throng and rushed upstairs to Adele,
who had herself flown down to meet him, so that they met in each other's
arms half-way up the great stone staircase with a burst of those little
inarticulate cries which are the true unwritten language of love.
Together, with his arm round her, they ascended to the great hall where
old De la Noue with his son were peering out of the window at the
wonderful spectacle.

"Ah, monsieur," said the old nobleman, with his courtly bow, "I am
indeed rejoiced to see you safe under my roof again, not only for your
own sake, but for that of madame's eyes, which, if she will permit an
old man to say so, are much too pretty to spoil by straining them all
day in the hopes of seeing some one coming out of the forest.  You have
done forty miles, Monsieur de Catinat, and are doubtless hungry and
weary.  When you are yourself again I must claim my revenge in piquet,
for the cards lay against me the other night."

But Du Lhut had entered at De Catinat's heels with his tidings of
disaster.

"You will have another game to play, Monsieur de Sainte-Marie," said he.
"There are six hundred Iroquois in the woods and they are preparing to
attack."

"Tut, tut, we cannot allow our arrangements to be altered by a handful
of savages," said the seigneur.  "I must apologise to you, my dear De
Catinat, that you should be annoyed by such people while you are upon my
estate.  As regards the piquet, I cannot but think that your play from
king and knave is more brilliant than safe.  Now when I played piquet
last with De Lannes of Poitou--"

"De Lannes of Poitou is dead, and all his people," said Du Lhut.
"The blockhouse is a heap of smoking ashes."

The seigneur raised his eyebrows and took a pinch of snuff, tapping the
lid of his little round gold box.

"I always told him that his fort would be taken unless he cleared away
those maple trees which grew up to the very walls.  They are all dead,
you say?"

"Every man."

"And the fort burned?"

"Not a stick was left standing."

"Have you seen these rascals?"

"We saw the trail of a hundred and fifty.  Then there were a hundred in
canoes, and a war-party of four hundred passed us under the Flemish
Bastard.  Their camp is five miles down the river, and there cannot be
less than six hundred."

"You were fortunate in escaping them."

"But they were not so fortunate in escaping us.  We killed Brown Moose
and his son, and we fired the woods so as to drive them out of their
camp."

"Excellent! Excellent!" said the seigneur, clapping gently with his
dainty hands.  "You have done very well indeed, Du Lhut!  You are, I
presume, very tired?"

"I am not often tired.  I am quite ready to do the journey again."

"Then perhaps you would pick a few men and go  back into the woods to
see what these villains are doing?"

"I shall be ready in five minutes."

"Perhaps you would like to go also, Achille?" His son's dark eyes and
Indian face lit up with a  fierce joy.

"Yes, I shall go also," he answered.

"Very good, and we shall make all ready in your absence.  Madame, you
will excuse these little annoyances which mar the pleasure of your
visit.  Next time that you do me the honour to come here I trust that we
shall have cleared all these vermin from my estate.  We have our
advantages.  The Richelieu is a better fish pond, and these forests are
a finer deer preserve than any of which the king can boast.  But on the
other hand we have, as you see, our little troubles.  You will excuse me
now, as there are one or two things which demand my attention.
De Catinat, you are a tried soldier and I should be glad of your advice.
Onega, give me my lace handkerchief and my cane of clouded amber, and
take care of madame until her husband and I return."

It was bright daylight now, and the square enclosure within the stockade
was filled with an anxious crowd who had just learned the evil tidings.
Most of the _censitaires_ were old soldiers and trappers who had served
in many Indian wars, and whose swarthy faces and bold bearing told their
own story.  They were sons of a race which with better fortune or with
worse has burned more powder than any other nation upon earth, and as
they stood in little groups discussing the situation and examining their
arms, a leader could have asked for no more hardy or more war-like
following.  The women, however, pale and breathless, were hurrying in
from the outlying cottages, dragging their children with them, and
bearing over their shoulders the more precious of their household goods.
The confusion, the hurry, the cries of the children, the throwing down
of bundles and the rushing back for more, contrasted sharply with the
quiet and the beauty of the woods which encircled them, all bathed in
the bright morning sunlight.  It was strange to look upon the fairy
loveliness of their many-tinted foliage, and to know that the spirit of
murder and cruelty was roaming unchained behind that lovely screen.

The scouting party under Du Lhut and Achille de la Noue had already
left, and at the order of the seigneur the two gates were now secured
with huge bars of oak fitted into iron staples on either side.
The children were placed in the lower store-room with a few women to
watch them, while the others were told off to attend to the fire
buckets, and to reload the muskets.  The men had been paraded, fifty-two
of them in all, and they were divided into parties now for the defence
of each part of the stockade.  On one side it had been built up to
within a few yards of the river, which not only relieved them from the
defence of that face, but enabled them to get fresh water by throwing a
bucket at the end of a rope from the stockade.  The boats and canoes of
Sainte Marie were drawn up on the bank just under the wall, and were
precious now as offering a last means of escape should all else fail.
The next fort, St. Louis, was but a few leagues up the river, and De la
Noue had already sent a swift messenger to them with news of the danger.
At least it would be a point on which they might retreat should the
worst come to the worst.  And that the worst might come to the worst was
very evident to so experienced a woodsman as Amos Green.  He had left
Ephraim Savage snoring in a deep sleep upon the floor, and was now
walking round the defences with his pipe in his mouth, examining with a
critical eye every detail in connection with them.  The stockade was
very strong, nine feet high and closely built of oak stakes which were
thick enough to turn a bullet.  Half-way up it was loop-holed in long
narrow slits for the fire of the defenders.  But on the other hand the
trees grew up to within a hundred yards of it, and formed a screen for
the attack, while the garrison was so scanty that it could not spare
more than twenty men at the utmost for each face.  Amos knew how daring
and dashing were the Iroquois warriors, how cunning and fertile of
resource, and his face darkened as he thought of the young wife who had
come so far in their safe-keeping, and of the women and children whom he
had seen crowding into the fort.

"Would it not be better if you could send them up the river?" he
suggested to the seigneur.

"I should very gladly do so, monsieur, and perhaps if we are all alive
we may manage it to-night if the weather should be cloudy.  But I cannot
spare the men to guard them, and I cannot send them without a guard when
we know that Iroquois canoes are on the river and their scouts are
swarming on the banks."

"You are right.  It would be madness."

"I have stationed you on this eastern face with your friends and with
fifteen men.  Monsieur de Catinat, will you command the party?"

"Willingly."

"I will take the south face as it seems to be the point of danger.
Du Lhut can take the north, and five men should be enough to watch the
river side."

"Have we food and powder?"

"I have flour and smoked eels enough to see this matter through.
Poor fare, my dear sir, but I daresay you learned in Holland that a cup
of ditch water after a brush may have a better smack than the
blue-sealed Frontiniac which you helped me to finish the other night.
As to powder, we have all our trading stores to draw upon."

"We have not time to clear any of these trees?" asked the soldier.

"Impossible.  They would make better shelter down than up."

"But at least I might clear that patch of brushwood round the birch
sapling which lies between the east face and the edge of the forest.
It is good cover for their skirmishers."

"Yes, that should be fired without delay."

"Nay, I think that I might do better," said Amos.  "We might bait a trap
for them there.  Where is this powder of which you spoke?"

"Theuriet, the major-domo, is giving out powder in the main
store-house."

"Very good." Amos vanished upstairs, and returned with a large linen bag
in his hand.  This he filled with powder, and then, slinging it over his
shoulder, he carried it out to the clump of bushes and placed it at the
base of the sapling, cutting a strip out of the bark immediately above
the spot.  Then with a few leafy branches and fallen leaves he covered
the powder bag very carefully over so that it looked like a little
hillock of earth.  Having arranged all to his satisfaction he returned,
clambering over the stockade, and dropping down upon the other side.

"I think that we are all ready for them now," said the seigneur.
"I would that the women and children were in a safe place, but we may
send them down the river to-night if all goes well.  Has anyone heard
anything of Du Lhut?"

"Jean has the best ears of any of us, your excellency," said one man
from beside the brass corner cannon.  "He thought that he heard shots a
few minutes ago."

"Then he has come into touch with them.  Etienne, take ten men and go to
the withered oak to cover them if they are retreating, but do not go
another yard on any pretext.  I am too short-handed already.  Perhaps,
De Catinat, you wish to sleep?"

"No, I could not sleep."

"We can do no more down here.  What do you say to a round or two of
piquet?  A little turn of the cards will help us to pass the time."

They ascended to the upper hall, where Adele came and sat by her
husband, while the swarthy Onega crouched by the window looking keenly
out into the forest.  De Catinat had little thought to spare upon the
cards, as his mind wandered to the danger which threatened them and to
the woman whose hand rested upon his own.  The old nobleman, on the
other hand, was engrossed by the play, and cursed under his breath, or
chuckled and grinned as the luck swayed one way or the other.  Suddenly
as they played there came two sharp raps from without.

"Some one is tapping," cried Adele.

"It is death that is tapping," said the Indian woman at the window.

"Ay, ay, it was the patter of two spent balls against the woodwork.
The wind is against our hearing the report.  The cards are shuffled.
It is my cut and your deal.  The capot, I think, was mine."

"Men are rushing from the woods," cried Onega.

"Tut!  It grows serious!" said the nobleman.  "We can finish the game
later.  Remember that the deal lies with you.  Let us see what it all
means."

De Catinat had already rushed to the window.  Du Lhut, young Achille de
la Noue, and eight of the covering party were running with their heads
bent towards the stockade, the door of which had been opened to admit
them.  Here and there from behind the trees came little blue puffs of
smoke, and one of the fugitives who wore white calico breeches began
suddenly to hop instead of running and a red splotch showed upon the
white cloth.  Two others threw their arms round him and the three rushed
in abreast while the gate swung into its place behind them.  An instant
later the brass cannon at the corner gave a flash and a roar while the
whole outline of the wood was traced in a rolling cloud, and the shower
of bullets rapped up against the wooden wall like sleet on a window.




CHAPTER XXXVI.


THE TAKING OF THE STOCKADE.

Having left Adele to the care of her Indian hostess, and warned her for
her life to keep from the windows, De Catinat seized his musket and
rushed downstairs.  As he passed a bullet came piping through one of the
narrow embrasures and starred itself in a little blotch of lead upon the
opposite wall.  The seigneur had already descended and was conversing
with Du Lhut beside the door.

"A thousand of them, you say?"

"Yes, we came on a fresh trail of a large war-party, three hundred at
the least.  They are all Mohawks and Cayugas with a sprinkling of
Oneidas.  We had a running fight for a few miles, and we have lost five
men."

"All dead, I trust."

"I hope so, but we were hard pressed to keep from being cut off.
Jean Mance is shot through the leg."

"I saw that he was hit."

"We had best have all ready to retire to the house if they carry the
stockade.  We can scarce hope to hold it when they are twenty to one."

"All is ready."

"And with our cannon we can keep their canoes from passing, so we might
send our women away to-night."

"I had intended to do so.  Will you take charge of the north side?
You might come across to me with ten of your men now, and I shall go
back to you if they change their attack."

The firing came in one continuous rattle now from the edges of the wood,
and the air was full of bullets.  The assailants were all trained shots,
men who lived by their guns, and to whom a shaking hand or a dim eye
meant poverty and hunger.  Every slit and crack and loop-hole was
marked, and a cap held above the stockade was blown in an instant from
the gun barrel which supported it.  On the other hand, the defenders
were also skilled in Indian fighting, and wise in every trick and lure
which could protect themselves or tempt their enemies to show.  They
kept well to the sides of the loop-holes, watching through little
crevices of the wood, and firing swiftly when a chance offered.  A red
leg sticking straight up into the air from behind a log showed where one
bullet at least had gone home, but there was little to aim at save a
puff and flash from among the leaves, or the shadowy figure of a warrior
seen for an instant as he darted from one tree-trunk to the other.
Seven of the Canadians had already been hit, but only three were
mortally wounded, and the other four still kept manfully to their
loop-holes, though one who had been struck through the jaw was spitting
his teeth with his bullets down into his gun-barrel.  The women sat in a
line upon the ground, beneath the level of the loop-holes, each with a
saucerful of bullets and a canister of powder, passing up the loaded
guns to the fighting men at the points where a quick fire was most
needful.

At first the attack had been all upon the south face, but as fresh
bodies of the Iroquois came up their line spread and lengthened until
the whole east face was girt with fire, which gradually enveloped the
north also.  The fort was ringed in by a great loop of smoke, save only
where the broad river flowed past them.  Over near the further bank the
canoes were lurking, and one, manned by ten warriors, attempted to pass
up the stream, but a good shot from the brass gun dashed in her side and
sank her, while a second of grape left only four of the swimmers whose
high scalp-locks stood out above the water like the back-fins of some
strange fish.  On the inland side, however, the seigneur had ordered the
cannon to be served no more, for the broad embrasures drew the enemy's
fire, and of the men who had been struck half were among those who
worked the guns.

The old nobleman strutted about with his white ruffles and his clouded
cane behind the line of parched smoke-grimed men, tapping his snuff-box,
shooting out his little jests, and looking very much less concerned than
he had done over his piquet.

"What do you think of it, Du Lhut?" he asked.

"I think very badly of it.  We are losing men much too fast."

"Well, my friend, what can you expect?  When a thousand muskets are all
turned upon a little place like this, some one must suffer for it.
Ah, my poor fellow, so you are done for too!"

The man nearest him had suddenly fallen with a crash, lying quite still
with his face in a platter of the sagamite which had been brought out by
the women.  Du Lhut glanced at him and then looked round.

"He is in a line with no loop-hole, and it took him in the shoulder,"
said he.  "Where did it come from then?  Ah, by Saint Anne, look there!"
He pointed upwards to a little mist of smoke which hung round the summit
of a high oak.

"The rascal overlooks the stockade.  But the trunk is hardly thick
enough to shield him at that height.  This poor fellow will not need his
musket again, and I see that it is ready primed."  De la Noue laid down
his cane, turned back his ruffles, picked up the dead man's gun, and
fired at the lurking warrior.  Two leaves fluttered out from the tree
and a grinning vermilion face appeared for an instant with a yell of
derision.  Quick as a flash Du Lhut brought his musket to his shoulder
and pulled the trigger.  The man gave a tremendous spring and crashed
down through the thick foliage.  Some seventy or eighty feet below him a
single stout branch shot out, and on to this he fell with the sound of a
great stone dropping into a bog, and hung there doubled over it,
swinging slowly from side to side like a red rag, his scalp-lock
streaming down between his feet.  A shout of exultation rose from the
Canadians at the sight, which was drowned in the murderous yell of the
savages.

"His limbs twitch.  He is not dead," cried De la Noue.

"Let him die there," said the old pioneer callously, ramming a fresh
charge into his gun.  "Ah, there is the gray hat again.  It comes ever
when I am unloaded."

"I saw a plumed hat among the brushwood."

"It is the Flemish Bastard.  I had rather have his scalp than those of
his hundred best warriors."

"Is he so brave then?"

"Yes, he is brave enough.  There is no denying it, for how else could he
be an Iroquois war-chief?  But he is clever and cunning, and cruel--
Ah, my God, if all the stories told are true, his cruelty is past
believing.  I should fear that my tongue would wither if I did but name
the things which this man has done.  Ah, he is there again."

The gray hat with the plume had shown itself once more in a rift of the
smoke.  De la Noue and Du Lhut both fired together, and the cap
fluttered up into the air.  At the same instant the bushes parted, and a
tall warrior sprang out into full view of the defenders.  His face was
that of an Indian, but a shade or two lighter, and a pointed black beard
hung down over his hunting tunic.  He threw out his hands with a gesture
of disdain, stood for an instant looking steadfastly at the fort, and
then sprang back into cover amid a shower of bullets which chipped away
the twigs all round him.

"Yes, he is brave enough," Du Lhut repeated with an oath.
"Your _censitaires_ have had their hoes in their hands more often than
their muskets, I should judge from their shooting.  But they seem to be
drawing closer upon the east face, and I think that they will make a
rush there before long."

The fire had indeed grown very much fiercer upon the side which was
defended by De Catinat, and it was plain that the main force of the
Iroquois were gathered at that point.  From every log, and trunk, and
cleft, and bush came the red flash with the gray halo, and the bullets
sang in a continuous stream through the loop-holes.  Amos had whittled a
little hole for himself about a foot above the ground, and lay upon his
face loading and firing in his own quiet methodical fashion.  Beside him
stood Ephraim Savage, his mouth set grimly, his eyes flashing from under
his down-drawn brows, and his whole soul absorbed in the smiting of the
Amalekites.  His hat was gone, his grizzled hair flying in the breeze,
great splotches of powder mottled his mahogany face, and a weal across
his right cheek showed where an Indian bullet had grazed him.
De Catinat was bearing himself like an experienced soldier, walking up
and down among his men with short words of praise or of precept, those
fire-words rough and blunt which bring a glow to the heart and a flush
to the cheek.  Seven of his men were down, but as the attack grew
fiercer upon his side it slackened upon the others, and the seigneur
with his son and Du Lhut brought ten men to reinforce them.  De la Noue
was holding out his snuff-box to De Catinat when a shrill scream from
behind them made them both look round.  Onega, the Indian wife, was
wringing her hands over the body of her son.  A glance showed that the
bullet had pierced his heart and that he was dead.

For an instant the old nobleman's thin face grew a shade paler, and the
hand which held out the little gold box shook like a branch in the wind.
Then he thrust it into his pocket again and mastered the spasm which had
convulsed his features.

"The De la Noues always die upon the field of honour," he remarked.
"I think that we should have some more men in the angle by the gun."

And now it became clear why it was that the Iroquois had chosen the
eastern face for their main attack.  It was there that the clump of
cover lay midway between the edge of the forest and the stockade.  A
storming party could creep as far as that and gather there for the final
rush.  First one crouching warrior, and then a second, and then a third
darted across the little belt of open space, and threw themselves down
among the bushes.  The fourth was hit, and lay with his back broken a
few paces out from the edge of the wood, but a stream of warriors
continued to venture the passage, until thirty-six had got across, and
the little patch of underwood was full of lurking savages.  Amos Green's
time had come.

From where he lay he could see the white patch where he had cut the bark
from the birch sapling, and he knew that immediately underneath it lay
the powder bag.  He sighted the mark, and then slowly lowered his barrel
until he had got to the base of the little trees as nearly as he could
guess it among the tangle of bushes.  The first shot produced no result,
however, and the second was aimed a foot lower.  The bullet penetrated
the bag, and there was an explosion which shook the manor-house and
swayed the whole line of stout stockades as though they were corn-stalks
in a breeze.  Up to the highest summits of the trees went the huge
column of blue smoke, and after the first roar there was a deathly
silence which was broken by the patter and thud of falling bodies.  Then
came a wild cheer from the defenders, and a furious answering whoop from
the Indians, while the fire from the woods burst out with greater fury
than ever.

But the blow had been a heavy one.  Of the thirty-six warriors, all
picked for their valour, only four regained the shelter of the woods,
and those so torn and shattered that they were spent men.  Already the
Indians had lost heavily, and this fresh disaster made them reconsider
their plan of attack, for the Iroquois were as wary as they were brave,
and he was esteemed the best war-chief who was most chary of the lives
of his followers.  Their fire gradually slackened, and at last, save for
a dropping shot here and there, it died away  altogether.

"Is it possible that they are going to abandon the attack?" cried De
Catinat joyously.  "Amos, I believe that you have saved us."

But the wily Du Lhut shook his head.  "A wolf would as soon leave a
half-gnawed bone as an Iroquois such a prize as this."

"But they have lost heavily."

"Ay, but not so heavily as ourselves in proportion to our numbers.
They have fifty out of a thousand, and we twenty out of threescore.  No,
no, they are holding a council, and we shall soon hear from them again.
But it may be some hours first, and if you will take my advice you will
have an hour's sleep, for you are not, as I can see by your eyes, as
used to doing without it as I am, and there may be little rest for any
of us this night."

De Catinat was indeed weary to the last pitch of human endurance.  Amos
Green and the seaman had already wrapped themselves in their blankets
and sunk to sleep under the shelter of the stockade.  The soldier rushed
upstairs to say a few words of comfort to the trembling Adele, and then
throwing himself down upon a couch he slept the dreamless sleep of an
exhausted man.  When at last he was roused by a fresh sputter of
musketry fire from the woods the sun was already low in the heavens, and
the mellow light of evening tinged the bare walls of the room.
He sprang from his couch, seized his musket, and rushed downstairs.
The defenders were gathered at their loop-holes once more, while Du
Lhut, the seigneur, and Amos Green were whispering eagerly together.
He noticed as he passed that Onega still sat crooning by the body of her
son, without having changed her position since morning.

"What is it, then?  Are they coming on?" he asked.

"They are up to some devilry," said Du Lhut, peering out at the corner
of the embrasure.  "They are gathering thickly at the east fringe, and
yet the firing comes from the south.  It is not the Indian way to attack
across the open, and yet if they think help is coming from the fort they
might venture it."

"The wood in front of us is alive with them," said Amos.  "They are as
busy as beavers among the underwood."

"Perhaps they are going to attack from this side, and cover the attack
by a fire from the flank."

"That is what I think," cried the seigneur.  "Bring the spare guns up
here and all the men except five for each side."

The words were hardly out of his mouth when a shrill yell burst from the
wood, and in an instant a cloud of warriors dashed out and charged
across the open, howling, springing, and waving their guns or tomahawks
in the air.  With their painted faces, smeared and striped with every
vivid colour, their streaming scalp-locks, their waving arms, their open
mouths, and their writhings and contortions, no more fiendish crew ever
burst into a sleeper's nightmare.  Some of those in front bore canoes
between them, and as they reached the stockade they planted them against
it and swarmed up them as if they had been scaling-ladders.  Others
fired through the embrasures and loop-holes, the muzzles of their
muskets touching those of the defenders, while others again sprang
unaided on to the tops of the palisades and jumped fearlessly down upon
the inner side.  The Canadians, however, made such a resistance as might
be expected from men who knew that no mercy awaited them.  They fired
whilst they had time to load, and then, clubbing their muskets, they
smashed furiously at every red head which showed above the rails.  The
din within the stockade was infernal, the shouts and cries of the
French, the whooping of the savages, and the terrified screaming of the
frightened women blending into one dreadful uproar, above which could be
heard the high shrill voice of the old seigneur imploring his
_censitaires_ to stand fast.  With his rapier in his hand, his hat lost,
his wig awry, and his dignity all thrown to the winds, the old nobleman
showed them that day how a soldier of Rocroy could carry himself, and
with Du Lhut, Amos, De Catinat and Ephraim Savage, was ever in the
forefront of the defence.  So desperately did they fight, the sword and
musket-butt outreaching the tomahawk, that though at one time fifty
Iroquois were over the palisades, they had slain or driven back nearly
all of them when a fresh wave burst suddenly over the south face which
had been stripped of its defenders.  Du Lhut saw in an instant that the
enclosure was lost and that only one thing could save the house.

"Hold them for an instant," he screamed, and rushing at the brass gun he
struck his flint and steel and fired it straight into the thick of the
savages.  Then as they recoiled for an instant he stuck a nail into the
touch-hole and drove it home with a blow from the butt of his gun.
Darting across the yard he spiked the gun at the other corner, and was
back at the door as the remnants of the garrison were hurled towards it
by the rush of the assailants.  The Canadians darted in, and swung the
ponderous mass of wood into position, breaking the leg of the foremost
warrior who had striven to follow them.  Then for an instant they had
time for breathing and for council.



CHAPTER XXXVII.


THE COMING OF THE FRIAR.

But their case was a very evil one.  Had the guns been lost so that they
might be turned upon the door, all further resistance would have been
vain, but Du Lhut's presence of mind had saved them from that danger.
The two guns upon the river face and the canoes were safe, for they were
commanded by the windows of the house.  But their numbers were terribly
reduced, and those who were left were weary and wounded and spent.
Nineteen had gained the house, but one had been shot through the body
and lay groaning in the hall, while a second had his shoulder cleft by a
tomahawk and could no longer raise his musket.  Du Lhut, De la Noue, and
De Catinat were uninjured, but Ephraim Savage had a bullet-hole in his
forearm, and Amos was bleeding from a cut upon the face.  Of the others
hardly one was without injury, and yet they had no time to think of
their hurts for the danger still pressed and they were lost unless they
acted.  A few shots from the barricaded windows sufficed to clear the
enclosure, for it was all exposed to their aim; but on the other hand
they had the shelter of the stockade now, and from the further side of
it they kept up a fierce fire upon the windows.  Half-a-dozen of the
_censitaires_ returned the fusillade, while the leaders consulted as to
what had best be done.

"We have twenty-five women and fourteen children," said the seigneur.
"I am sure that you will agree with me, gentlemen, that our first duty
is towards them.  Some of you, like myself, have lost sons or brothers
this day.  Let us at least save our wives and sisters."

"No Iroquois canoes have passed up the river," said one of the
Canadians.  "If the women start in the darkness they can get away to the
fort."

"By Saint Anne of Beaupre," exclaimed Du Lhut, "I think it would be well
if you could get your men out of this also, for I cannot see how it is
to be held until morning."

A murmur of assent broke from the other Canadians, but the old nobleman
shook his bewigged head with decision.

"Tut!  Tut!  What nonsense is this!" he cried.  "Are we to abandon the
manor-house of Sainte Marie to the first gang of savages who choose to
make an attack upon it?  No, no, gentlemen, there are still nearly a
score of us, and when the garrison learn that we are so pressed, which
will be by to-morrow morning at the latest, they will certainly send us
relief."

Du Lhut shook his head moodily.

"If you stand by the fort I will not desert you," said he, "and yet it
is a pity to sacrifice brave men for nothing."

"The canoes will hardly hold the women and children as it is," cried
Theuriet.  "There are but two large and four small.  There is not space
for a single man."

"Then that decides it," said De Catinat.  "But who are to row the
women?"

"It is but a few leagues with the current in their favour, and there are
none of our women who do not know how to handle a paddle."

The Iroquois were very quiet now, and an occasional dropping shot from
the trees or the stockade was the only sign of their presence.  Their
losses had been heavy, and they were either engaged in collecting their
dead, or in holding a council as to their next move.  The twilight was
gathering in, and the sun had already sunk beneath the tree-tops.
Leaving a watchman at each window, the leaders went round to the back of
the house where the canoes were lying upon the bank.  There were no
signs of the enemy upon the river to the north of them.

"We are in luck," said Amos.  "The clouds are gathering and there will
be little light."

"It is luck indeed, since the moon is only three days past the full,"
answered Du Lhut.  "I wonder that the Iroquois have not cut us off upon
the water, but it is likely that their canoes have gone south to bring
up another war-party.  They may be back soon, and we had best not lose a
moment."

"In an hour it might be dark enough to start."

"I think that there is rain in those clouds, and that will make it
darker still."

The women and children were assembled and their places in each boat were
assigned to them.  The wives of the censitaires, rough hardy women whose
lives had been spent under the shadow of a constant danger, were for the
most part quiet and collected, though a few of the younger ones
whimpered a little.  A woman is always braver when she has a child to
draw her thoughts from herself, and each married woman had one now
allotted to her as her own special charge until they should reach the
fort.  To Onega, the Indian wife of the seigneur, who was as wary and as
experienced as a war sachem of her people, the command of the women was
entrusted.

"It is not very far, Adele," said De Catinat, as his wife clung to his
arm.  "You remember how we heard the Angelus bells as we journeyed
through the woods.  That was Fort St. Louis, and it is but a league or
two."

"But I do not wish to leave you, Amory.  We have been together in all
our troubles.  Oh, Amory, why should we be divided now?"

"My dear love, you will tell them at the fort how things are with us,
and they will bring us help."

"Let the others do that, and I will stay.  I will not be useless, Amory.
Onega has taught me to load a gun.  I will not be afraid, indeed I will
not, if you will only let me stay."

"You must not ask it, Adele.  It is impossible, child I could not let
you stay."

"But I feel so sure that it would be best."

The coarser reason of man has not yet learned to value those subtle
instincts which guide a woman.  De Catinat argued and exhorted until he
had silenced if he had not convinced her.

"It is for my sake, dear.  You do not know what a load it will be from
my heart when I know that you are safe.  And you need not be afraid for
me.  We can easily hold the place until morning.  Then the people from
the fort will come, for I hear that they have plenty of canoes, and we
shall all meet again."

Adele was silent, but her hands tightened upon his arm.  Her husband was
still endeavouring to reassure her when a groan burst from the watcher
at the window which overlooked the stream.

"There is a canoe on the river to the north of us," he cried.

The besieged looked at each other in dismay.  The Iroquois had then cut
off their retreat after all.

"How many warriors are in it?" asked the seigneur.

"I cannot see.  The light is not very good, and it is in the shadow of
the bank."

"Which way is it coming?"

"It is coming this way.  Ah, it shoots out into the open now, and I can
see it.  May the good Lord be praised!  A dozen candles shall burn in
Quebec Cathedral if I live till next summer!"

"What is it then?" cried De la Noue impatiently.

"It is not an Iroquois canoe.  There is but one man in it.  He is a
Canadian."

"A Canadian!" cried Du Lhut, springing up to the window.  "Who but a
madman would venture into such a hornet's nest alone!  Ah, yes, I can
see him now.  He keeps well out from the bank to avoid their fire.  Now
he is in mid-stream and he turns towards us.  By my faith, it is not the
first time that the good father has handled a paddle."

"It is a Jesuit!" said one, craning his neck.  "They are ever where
there is most danger."

"No, I can see his capote," cried another.  "It is a Franciscan friar!"

An instant later there was the sound of a canoe grounding upon the
pebbles, the door was unbarred, and a man strode in, attired in the long
brown gown of the Franciscans.  He cast a rapid glance around, and then,
stepping up to De Catinat, laid his hand upon his shoulder.

"So, you have not escaped me!" said he.  "We have caught the evil seed
before it has had time to root."

"What do you mean, father?" asked the seigneur.  "You have made some
mistake.  This is my good friend Amory de Catinat, of a noble French
family."

"This is Amory de Catinat, the heretic and Huguenot," cried the monk.
"I have followed him up the St. Lawrence, and I have followed him up the
Richelieu, and I would have followed him to the world's end if I could
but bring him back with me."

"Tut, father, your zeal carries you too far," said the seigneur.
"Whither would you take my friend, then?"

"He shall go back to France with his wife.  There is no place in Canada
for heretics."

Du Lhut burst out laughing.  "By Saint Anne, father," said he, "if you
could take us all back to France at present we should be very much your
debtors."

"And you will remember," said De la Noue sternly, "that you are under my
roof and that you are speaking of my guest."

But the friar was not to be abashed by the frown of the old nobleman.

"Look at this," said he, whipping a paper out of his bosom.  "It is
signed by the governor, and calls upon you, under pain of the king's
displeasure, to return this man to Quebec.  Ah, monsieur, when you left
me upon the island that morning you little thought that I would return
to Quebec for this, and then hunt you down so many hundreds of miles of
river.  But I have you now, and I shall never leave you until I see you
on board the ship which will carry you and your wife back to France."

For all the bitter vindictiveness which gleamed in the monk's eyes, De
Catinat could not but admire the energy and tenacity of the man.

"It seems to me, father, that you would have shone more as a soldier
than as a follower of Christ," said he; "but, since you have followed us
here, and since there is no getting away, we may settle this question at
some later time."

But the two Americans were less inclined to take so peaceful a view.
Ephraim Savage's beard bristled with anger, and he whispered something
into Amos Green's ear.

"The captain and I could easily get rid of him," said the young
woodsman, drawing De Catinat aside.  "If he _will_ cross our path he
must pay for it."

"No, no, not for the world, Amos!  Let him alone.  He does what he
thinks to be his duty, though his faith is stronger than his charity, I
think.  But here comes the rain, and surely it is dark enough now for
the boats."

A great brown cloud had overspread the heavens, and the night had fallen
so rapidly that they could hardly see the gleam of the river in front of
them.  The savages in the woods and behind the captured stockade were
quiet, save for an occasional shot, but the yells and whoops from the
cottages of the _censitaires_ showed that they were being plundered by
their captors.  Suddenly a dull red glow began to show above one of the
roofs.

"They have set it on fire," cried Du Lhut.  "The canoes must go at once,
for the river will soon be as light as day.  In!  In!  There is not an
instant to lose!"

There was no time for leave-taking.  One impassioned kiss and Adele was
torn away and thrust into the smallest canoe, which she shared with
Onega, two children, and an unmarried girl.  The others rushed into
their places, and in a few moments they had pushed off, and had vanished
into the drift and the darkness.  The great cloud had broken and the
rain pattered heavily upon the roof, and splashed upon their faces as
they strained their eyes after the vanishing boats.

"Thank God for this storm!" murmured Du Lhut.  "It will prevent the
cottages from blazing up too quickly."

But he had forgotten that though the roofs might be wet the interior was
as dry as tinder.  He had hardly spoken before a great yellow tongue of
flame licked out of one of the windows, and again and again, until
suddenly half of the roof fell in, and the cottage was blazing like a
pitch-bucket.  The flames hissed and sputtered in the pouring rain, but,
fed from below, they grew still higher and fiercer, flashing redly upon
the great trees, and turning their trunks to burnished brass.
Their light made the enclosure and the manor-house as clear as day, and
exposed the whole long stretch of the river.  A fearful yell from the
woods announced that the savages had seen the canoes, which were plainly
visible from the windows not more than a quarter of a mile away.

"They are rushing through the woods.  They are making for the water's
edge," cried De Catinat.

"They have some canoes down there," said Du Lhut.

"But they must pass us!" cried the Seigneur of Sainte Marie.  "Get down
to the cannon and see if you cannot stop them."

They had hardly reached the guns when two large canoes filled with
warriors shot out from among the reeds below the fort, and steering out
into mid-stream began to paddle furiously after the fugitives.

"Jean, you are our best shot," cried De la Noue.  "Lay for her as she
passes the great pine tree.  Lambert, do you take the other gun.  The
lives of all whom you love may hang upon the shot!"

The two wrinkled old artillerymen glanced along their guns and waited
for the canoes to come abreast of them.  The fire still blazed higher
and higher, and the broad river lay like a sheet of dull metal with two
dark lines, which marked the canoes, sweeping swiftly down the centre.
One was fifty yards in front of the other, but in each the Indians were
bending to their paddles and pulling frantically, while their comrades
from the wooded shores whooped them on to fresh exertions.
The fugitives had already disappeared round the bend of the river.

As the first canoe came abreast of the lower of the two guns, the
Canadian made the sign of the cross over the touch-hole and fired.
A cheer and then a groan went up from the eager watchers.  The discharge
had struck the surface close to the mark, and dashed such a shower of
water over it that for an instant it looked as if it had been sunk.
The next moment, however, the splash subsided, and the canoe shot away
uninjured, save that one of the rowers had dropped his paddle while his
head fell forward upon the back of the man in front of him.  The second
gunner sighted the same canoe as it came abreast of him, but at the very
instant when he stretched out his match to fire a bullet came humming
from the stockade and he fell forward dead without a groan.

"This is work that I know something of, lad," said old Ephraim,
springing suddenly forward.  "But when I fire a gun I like to train it
myself.  Give me a help with the handspike and get her straight for the
island.  So!  A little lower for an even keel!  Now we have them!"
He clapped down his match and fired.

It was a beautiful shot.  The whole charge took the canoe about six feet
behind the bow, and doubled her up like an eggshell.  Before the smoke
had cleared she had foundered, and the second canoe had paused to pick
up some of the wounded men.  The others, as much at home in the water as
in the woods, were already striking out for the shore.

"Quick!  Quick!" cried the seigneur.  "Load the gun!  We may get the
second one yet!"

But it was not to be.  Long before they could get it ready the Iroquois
had picked up their wounded warriors and were pulling madly up-stream
once more.  As they shot away the fire died suddenly down in the burning
cottages and the rain and the darkness closed in upon them.

"My God!" cried De Catinat furiously, "they will be taken.  Let us
abandon this place, take a boat, and follow them.  Come!  Come!  Not an
instant is to be lost!"

"Monsieur, you go too far in your very natural anxiety," said the
seigneur coldly.  "I am not inclined to leave my post so easily!"

"Ah, what is it?  Only wood and stone, which can be built again.  But to
think of the women in the hands of these devils! Oh, I am going mad!
Come!  Come!  For Christ's sake come!"  His face was deadly pale, and he
raved with his clenched hands in the air.

"I do not think that they will be caught," said Du Lhut, laying his hand
soothingly upon his shoulder.  "Do not fear.  They had a long start and
the women here can paddle as well as the men.  Again, the Iroquois canoe
was overloaded at the start, and has the wounded men aboard as well now.
Besides, these oak canoes of the Mohawks are not as swift as the
Algonquin birch barks which we use.  In any case it is impossible to
follow, for we have no boat."

"There is one lying there."

"Ah, it will but hold a single man.  It is that in which the friar
came."

"Then I am going in that!  My place is with Adele!"  He flung open the
door, rushed out, and was about to push off the frail skiff, when some
one sprang past him, and with a blow from a hatchet stove in the side of
the boat.

"It is my boat," said the friar, throwing down the axe and folding his
arms.  "I can do what I like with it."

"You fiend!  You have ruined us!"

"I have found you and you shall not escape me again."

The hot blood flushed to the soldier's head, and picking up the axe, he
took a quick step forward.  The light from the open door shone upon the
grave, harsh face of the friar, but not a muscle twitched nor a feature
changed as he saw the axe whirl up in the hands of a furious man.
He only signed himself with the cross, and muttered a Latin prayer under
his breath.  It was that composure which saved his life.  De Catinat
hurled down the axe again with a bitter curse, and was turning away from
the shattered boat, when in an instant, without a warning, the great
door of the manor-house crashed inwards, and a flood of whooping savages
burst into the house.



CHAPTER XXXVIII.


THE DINING HALL OF SAINTE MARIE.

What had occurred is easily explained.  The watchers in the windows at
the front found that it was more than flesh and blood could endure to
remain waiting at their posts while the fates of their wives and
children were being decided at the back.  All was quiet at the stockade,
and the Indians appeared to be as absorbed as the Canadians in what was
passing upon the river.  One by one, therefore, the men on guard had
crept away and had assembled at the back to cheer the seaman's shot and
to groan as the remaining canoe sped like a bloodhound down the river in
the wake of the fugitives.  But the savages had one at their head who
was as full of wiles and resource as Du Lhut himself.  The Flemish
Bastard had watched the house from behind the stockade as a dog watches
a rat-hole, and he had instantly discovered that the defenders had left
their post.  With a score of other warriors he raised a great log from
the edge of the forest, and crossing the open space unchallenged, he and
his men rushed it against the door with such violence as to crack the
bar across and tear the wood from the hinges.  The first intimation
which the survivors had of the attack was the crash of the door, and the
screams of two of the negligent watchmen who had been seized and scalped
in the hall.  The whole basement floor was in the hands of the Indians,
and De Catinat and his enemy the friar were cut off from the foot of the
stairs.

Fortunately, however, the manor-houses of Canada were built with the one
idea of defence against Indians, and even now there were hopes for the
defenders.  A wooden ladder which could be drawn up in case of need hung
down from the upper windows to the ground upon the river-side.
De Catinat rushed round to this, followed by the friar.  He felt about
for the ladder in the darkness.  It was gone.

Then indeed his heart sank in despair.  Where could he fly to?  The boat
was destroyed.  The stockades lay between him and the forest, and they
were in the hands of the Iroquois.  Their yells were ringing in his
ears.  They had not seen him yet, but in a few minutes they must come
upon him.  Suddenly he heard a voice from somewhere in the darkness
above him.

"Give me your gun, lad," it said.  "I see the loom of some of the
heathen down by the wall."

"It is I.  It is I, Amos," cried De Catinat.  "Down with the ladder or I
am a dead man."

"Have a care.  It may be a ruse," said the voice of Du Lhut.

"No, no, I'll answer for it," cried Amos, and an instant later down came
the ladder.  De Catinat and the friar rushed up it, and they hardly had
their feet upon the rungs when a swarm of warriors burst out from the
door and poured along the river bank.  Two muskets flashed from above,
something plopped like a salmon in the water, and next instant the two
were among their comrades and the ladder had been drawn up once more.

But it was a very small band who now held the last point to which they
could retreat.  Only nine of them remained, the seigneur, Du Lhut, the
two Americans, the friar, De Catinat, Theuriet the major-domo, and two
of the _censitaires_.  Wounded, parched, and powder-blackened, they were
still filled with the mad courage of desperate men who knew that death
could come in no more terrible form than through surrender.  The stone
staircase ran straight up from the kitchen to the main hall, and the
door, which had been barricaded across the lower part by two mattresses,
commanded the whole flight.  Hoarse whisperings and the click of the
cocking of guns from below told that the Iroquois were mustering for a
rush.

"Put the lantern by the door," said Du Lhut, "so that it may throw the
light upon the stair.  There is only room for three to fire, but you can
all load and pass the guns.  Monsieur Green, will you kneel with me, and
you, Jean Duval?  If one of us is hit let another take his place at
once.  Now be ready, for they are coming!"

As he spoke there was a shrill whistle from below, and in an instant the
stair was filled with rushing red figures and waving weapons.
Bang!  Bang!  Bang! went the three guns, and then again and again
Bang!  Bang!  Bang!  The smoke was so thick in the low-roofed room that
they could hardly see to pass the muskets to the eager hands which
grasped for them.  But no Iroquois had reached the barricade, and there
was no patter of their feet now upon the stair.  Nothing but an angry
snarling and an occasional groan from below.  The marksmen were
uninjured, but they ceased to fire and waited for the smoke to clear.

And when it cleared they saw how deadly their aim had been at those
close quarters.  Only nine shots had been fired, and seven Indians were
littered up and down on the straight stone stair.  Five of them lay
motionless, but two tried to crawl slowly back to their friends.
Du Lhut and the _censitaire_ raised their muskets, and the two crippled
men lay still.

"By Saint Anne!" said the old pioneer, as he rammed home another bullet.
"If they have our scalps we have sold them at a great price.  A hundred
squaws will be howling in their villages when they hear of this day's
work."

"Ay, they will not forget their welcome at Sainte Marie," said the old
nobleman.  "I must again express my deep regret, my dear De Catinat,
that you and your wife should have been put to such inconvenience when
you have been good enough to visit me.  I trust that she and the others
are safe at the fort by this time."

"May God grant that they are!  Oh, I shall never have an easy moment
until I see her once more."

"If they are safe we may expect help in the morning, if we can hold out
so long.  Chambly, the commandant, is not a man to leave a comrade at a
pinch."

The cards were still laid out at one end of the table, with the tricks
overlapping each other, as they had left them on the previous morning.
But there was something else there of more interest to them, for the
breakfast had not been cleared away, and they had been fighting all day
with hardly bite or sup.  Even when face to face with death, Nature
still cries out for her dues, and the hungry men turned savagely upon
the loaf, the ham, and the cold wild duck.  A little cluster of wine
bottles stood upon the buffet, and these had their necks knocked off,
and were emptied down parched throats.  Three men still took their turn,
however, to hold the barricade, for they were not to be caught napping
again.  The yells and screeches of the savages came up to them as though
all the wolves of the forest were cooped up in the basement, but the
stair was deserted save for the seven motionless figures.

"They will not try to rush us again," said Du Lhut with confidence.
"We have taught them too severe a lesson."

"They will set fire to the house."

"It will puzzle them to do that," said the major-domo.  "It is solid
stone, walls and stair, save only for a few beams of wood, very
different from those other  cottages."

"Hush!" cried Amos Green, and raised his hand.  The yells had died away,
and they heard the heavy thud of a mallet beating upon wood.

"What can it be?"

"Some fresh devilry, no doubt."

"I regret to say, messieurs," observed the seigneur, with no abatement
of his courtly manner, "that it is my belief that they have learned a
lesson from our young friend here, and that they are knocking out the
heads of the powder-barrels in the store-room."

But Du Lhut shook his head at the suggestion.  "It is not in a Redskin
to waste powder," said he.  "It is a deal too precious for them to do
that.  Ah, listen to that!"

The yellings and screechings had begun again, but there was a wilder,
madder ring in their shrillness, and they were mingled with snatches of
song and bursts of laughter.

"Ha!  It is the brandy casks which they have opened," cried Du Lhut.
"They were bad before, but they will be fiends out of hell now."

As he spoke there came another burst of whoops, and high above them a
voice calling for mercy.  With horror in their eyes the survivors
glanced from one to the other.  A heavy smell of burning flesh rose from
below, and still that dreadful voice shrieking and pleading.  Then
slowly it quavered away and was silent forever.

"Who was it?" whispered De Catinat, his blood running cold in his veins.

"It was Jean Corbeil, I think."

"May God rest his soul!  His troubles are over.  Would that we were as
peaceful as he!  Ah, shoot him! Shoot!"

A man had suddenly sprung out at the foot of the stair and had swung his
arm as though throwing something.  It was the Flemish Bastard.
Amos Green's musket flashed, but the savage had sprung back again as
rapidly as he appeared.  Something splashed down amongst them and rolled
across the floor in the lamp-light.

"Down! Down!  It is a bomb!" cried De Catinat

But it lay at Du Lhut's feet, and he had seen it clearly.  He took a
cloth from the table and dropped it over it.

"It is not a bomb," said he quietly, "and it _was_ Jean Corbeil who
died."

For four hours sounds of riot, of dancing and of revelling rose up from
the store-house, and the smell of the open brandy casks filled the whole
air.  More than once the savages quarrelled and fought among themselves,
and it seemed as if they had forgotten their enemies above, but the
besieged soon found that if they attempted to presume upon this they
were as closely watched as ever.  The major-domo, Theuriet, passing
between a loop-hole and a light, was killed instantly by a bullet from
the stockade, and both Amos and the old seigneur had narrow escapes
until they blocked all the windows save that which overlooked the river.
There was no danger from this one, and, as day was already breaking once
more, one or other of the party was forever straining their eyes down
the stream in search of the expected succour.

Slowly the light crept up the eastern sky, a little line of pearl, then
a band of pink, broadening, stretching, spreading, until it shot its
warm colour across the heavens, tinging the edges of the drifting
clouds.  Over the woodlands lay a thin gray vapour, the tops of the high
oaks jutting out like dim islands from the sea of haze.  Gradually as
the light increased the mist shredded off into little ragged wisps,
which thinned and drifted away, until at last, as the sun pushed its
glowing edge over the eastern forests, it gleamed upon the reds and
oranges and purples of the fading leaves, and upon the broad blue river
which curled away to the northward.  De Catinat, as he stood at the
window looking out, was breathing in the healthy resinous scent of the
trees, mingled with the damp heavy odour of the wet earth, when suddenly
his eyes fell upon a dark spot upon the river to the north of them.
"There is a canoe coming down!" he cried.  In an instant they had all
rushed to the opening, but Du Lhut sprang after them, and pulled them
angrily towards the door.

"Do you wish to die before your time?" he cried.

"Ay, ay!" said Captain Ephraim, who understood the gesture if not the
words.  "We must leave a watch on deck.  Amos, lad, lie here with me and
be ready if they show."

The two Americans and the old pioneer held the barricade, while the eyes
of all the others were turned upon the approaching boat.  A groan broke
suddenly from the only surviving _censitaire_.

"It is an Iroquois canoe!" he cried.

"Impossible!"

"Alas, your excellency, it is so, and it is the same one which passed us
last night."

"Ah, then the women have escaped them."

"I trust so.  But alas, seigneur, I fear that there are more in the
canoe now than when they passed us."

The little group of survivors waited in breathless anxiety while the
canoe sped swiftly up the river, with a line of foam on either side of
her, and a long forked swirl in the waters behind.  They could see that
she appeared to be very crowded, but they remembered that the wounded of
the other boat were aboard her.  On she shot and on, until as she came
abreast of the fort she swung round, and the rowers raised their paddles
and burst into a shrill yell of derision.  The stern of the canoe was
turned towards them now, and they saw that two women were seated in it.
Even at that distance there was no mistaking the sweet pale face or the
dark queenly one beside it.  The one was Onega and the other was Adele.



CHAPTER XXXIX.


THE TWO SWIMMERS.

Charles de la Noue, Seigneur de Sainte Marie, was a hard and
self-contained man, but a groan and a bitter curse burst from him when
he saw his Indian wife in the hands of her kinsmen, from whom she could
hope for little mercy.  Yet even now his old-fashioned courtesy to his
guest had made him turn to De Catinat with some words of sympathy, when
there was a clatter of wood, something darkened the light of the window,
and the young soldier was gone.  Without a word he had lowered the
ladder and was clambering down it with frantic haste.  Then as his feet
touched the ground he signalled to his comrades to draw it up again, and
dashing into the river he swam towards the canoe.  Without arms and
without a plan he had but the one thought that his place was by the side
of his wife in this, the hour of her danger.  Fate should bring him what
it brought her, and he swore to himself, as he clove a way with his
strong arms, that whether it were life or death they should still share
it together.

But there was another whose view of duty led him from safety into the
face of danger.  All night the Franciscan had watched De Catinat as a
miser watches his treasure, filled with the thought that this heretic
was the one little seed which might spread and spread until it choked
the chosen vineyard of the Church.  Now when he saw him rush so suddenly
down the ladder, every fear was banished from his mind save the
overpowering one that he was about to lose his precious charge.
He, too, clambered down at the very heels of his prisoner, and rushed
into the stream not ten paces behind him.

And so the watchers at the window saw the strangest of sights.
There, in mid-stream, lay the canoe, with a ring of dark warriors
clustering in the stern, and the two women crouching in the midst of
them.  Swimming madly towards them was De Catinat, rising to the
shoulders with the strength of every stroke, and behind him again was
the tonsured head of the friar, with his brown capote and long trailing
gown floating upon the surface of the water behind him.  But in his zeal
he had thought too little of his own powers.  He was a good swimmer, but
he was weighted and hampered by his unwieldy clothes.  Slower and slower
grew his stroke, lower and lower his head, until at last with a great
shriek of _In manus tuas, Domine!_ he threw up his hands, and vanished
in the swirl of the river.  A minute later the watchers, hoarse with
screaming to him to return, saw De Catinat pulled aboard the Iroquois
canoe, which was instantly turned and continued its course up the river.

"My God!" cried Amos hoarsely.  "They have taken him.  He is lost."

"I have seen some strange things in these forty years, but never the
like of that!" said Du Lhut.

The seigneur took a little pinch of snuff from his gold box, and flicked
the wandering grains from his shirt-front with his dainty lace
handkerchief.

"Monsieur de Catinat has acted like a gentleman of France," said he.
"If I could swim now as I did thirty years ago, I should be by his
side."

Du Lhut glanced round him and shook his head.  "We are only six now,"
said he.  "I fear they are up to some devilry because they are so very
still."

"They are leaving the house!" cried the _censitaire_, who was peeping
through one of the side windows.  "What can it mean?  Holy Virgin, is it
possible that we are saved?  See how they throng through the trees.
They are making for the canoe.  Now they are waving their arms and
pointing."

"There is the gray hat of that mongrel devil amongst them," said the
captain.  "I would try a shot upon him were it not a waste of powder and
lead."

"I have hit the mark at as long a range," said Amos, pushing his long
brown gun through a chink in the barricade which they had thrown across
the lower half of the window.  "I would give my next year's trade to
bring him down."

"It is forty paces further than my musket would carry," remarked Du
Lhut, "but I have seen the English shoot a great way with those long
guns."

Amos took a steady aim, resting his gun upon the window sill, and fired.
A shout of delight burst from the little knot of survivors.  The Flemish
Bastard had fallen.  But he was on his feet again in an instant and
shook his hand defiantly at the window.

"Curse it!" cried Amos bitterly, in English.  "I have hit him with a
spent ball.  As well strike him with a pebble."

"Nay, curse not, Amos, lad, but try him again with another pinch of
powder if your gun will stand it."

The woodsman thrust in a full charge, and chose a well-rounded bullet
from his bag, but when he looked again both the Bastard and his warriors
had disappeared.  On the river the single Iroquois canoe which held the
captives was speeding south as swiftly as twenty paddles could drive it,
but save this one dark streak upon the blue stream, not a sign was to be
seen of their enemies.  They had vanished as if they had been an evil
dream.  There was the bullet-spotted stockade, the litter of dead bodies
inside it, the burned and roofless cottages, but the silent woods lay
gleaming in the morning sunshine as quiet and peaceful as if no
hell-burst of fiends had ever broken out from them.

"By my faith, I believe that they have gone!" cried the seigneur.

"Take care that it is not a ruse," said Du Lhut.  "Why should they fly
before six men when they have conquered sixty?"

But the _censitaire_ had looked out of the other window, and in an
instant he was down upon his knees with his hands in the air, and his
powder blackened face turned upwards, pattering out prayers and
thanksgivings.  His five comrades rushed across the room and burst into
a shriek of joy.  The upper reach of the river was covered with a
flotilla of canoes from which the sun struck quick flashes as it shone
upon the musket-barrels and trappings of the crews.  Already they could
see the white coats of the regulars, the brown tunics of the
coureurs-de-bois_, and the gaudy colours of the Hurons and Algonquins.
On they swept, dotting the whole breadth of the river, and growing
larger every instant, while far away on the southern bend, the Iroquois
canoe was a mere moving dot which had shot away to the farther side and
lost itself presently under the shadow of the trees.  Another minute and
the survivors were out upon the bank, waving their caps in the air,
while the prows of the first of their rescuers were already grating upon
the pebbles.  In the stern of the very foremost canoe sat a wizened
little man with a large brown wig, and a gilt-headed rapier laid across
his knees.  He sprang out as the keel touched bottom, splashing through
the shallow water with his high leather boots, and rushing up to the
seigneur, he flung himself into his arms.

"My dear Charles," he cried, "you have held your house like a hero.
What, only six of you!  Tut, tut, this has been a bloody business!"

"I knew that you would not desert a comrade, Chambly.  We have saved the
house, but our losses have been terrible.  My son is dead.  My wife is
in that Iroquois canoe in front of you."

The commandant of Fort St. Louis pressed his friend's hand in silent
sympathy.

"The others arrived all safe," he said at last.  "Only that one was
taken, on account of the breaking of a paddle.  Three were drowned and
two captured.  There was a French lady in it, I understand, as well as
madame."

"Yes, and they have taken her husband as well."

"Ah, poor souls!  Well, if you are strong enough to join us, you and
your friends, we shall follow after them without the loss of an instant.
Ten of my men will remain to guard the house, and you can have their
canoe.  Jump in then, and forward, for life and death may hang upon our
speed!"



CHAPTER XL.


THE END.

The Iroquois had not treated De Catinat harshly when they dragged him
from the water into their canoe.  So incomprehensible was it to them why
any man should voluntarily leave a place of safety in order to put
himself in their power that they could only set it down to madness, a
malady which inspires awe and respect among the Indians.  They did not
even tie his wrists, for why should he attempt to escape when he had
come of his own free will?  Two warriors passed their hands over him, to
be sure that he was unarmed, and he was then thrust down between the two
women, while the canoe darted in towards the bank to tell the others
that the St. Louis garrison was coming up the stream.  Then it steered
out again, and made its way swiftly up the centre of the river.
Adele was deadly pale and her hand, as her husband laid his upon it, was
as cold as marble.

"My darling," he whispered, "tell me that all is well with you--that you
are unhurt!"

"Oh, Amory, why did you come?  Why did you come, Amory?  Oh, I think I
could have borne anything, but if they hurt you I could not bear that."

"How could I stay behind when I knew that you were in their hands?
I should have gone mad!"

"Ah, it was my one consolation to think that you were safe."

"No, no, we have gone through so much together that we cannot part now.
What is death, Adele?  Why should we be afraid of it?"

"I am not afraid of it."

"And I am not afraid of it.  Things will come about as God wills it, and
what He wills must in the end be the best.  If we live, then we have
this memory in common.  If we die, then we go hand-in-hand into
another life.  Courage, my own, all will be well with us."

"Tell me, monsieur," said Onega, "is my lord still living?"

"Yes, he is alive and well."

"It is good.  He is a great chief, and I have never been sorry, not even
now, that I have wedded with one who was not of my own people.  But ah,
my son!  Who shall give my son back to me?  He was like the young
sapling, so straight and so strong!  Who could run with him, or leap
with him, or swim with him?  Ere that sun shines again we shall all be
dead, and my heart is glad, for I shall see my boy once more."

The Iroquois paddles had bent to their work until a good ten miles lay
between them and Sainte Marie.  Then they ran the canoe into a little
creek upon their own side of the river, and sprang out of her, dragging
the prisoners after them.  The canoe was carried on the shoulders of
eight men some distance into the wood, where they concealed it between
two fallen trees, heaping a litter of branches over it to screen it from
view.  Then, after a short council, they started through the forest,
walking in single file, with their three prisoners in the middle.
There were fifteen warriors in all, eight in front and seven behind, all
armed with muskets and as swift-footed as deer, so that escape was out
of the question.  They could but follow on, and wait in patience for
whatever might befall them.

All day they pursued their dreary march, picking their way through vast
morasses, skirting the borders of blue woodland lakes where the gray
stork flapped heavily up from the reeds at their approach, or plunging
into dark belts of woodland where it is always twilight, and where the
falling of the wild chestnuts and the chatter of the squirrels a hundred
feet above their heads were the only sounds which broke the silence.
Onega had the endurance of the Indians themselves, but Adele, in spite
of her former journeys, was footsore and weary before evening.  It was a
relief to De Catinat, therefore, when the red glow of a great fire beat
suddenly through the tree-trunks, and they came upon an Indian camp in
which was assembled the greater part of the war-party which had been
driven from Sainte Marie.  Here, too, were a number of the squaws who
had come from the Mohawk and Cayuga villages in order to be nearer to
the warriors.  Wigwams had been erected all round in a circle, and
before each of them were the fires with kettles slung upon a tripod of
sticks in which the evening meal was being cooked.  In the centre of all
was a very fierce fire which had been made of brushwood placed in a
circle, so as to leave a clear space of twelve feet in the middle.
A pole stood up in the centre of this clearing, and something all
mottled with red and black was tied up against it.  De Catinat stepped
swiftly in front of Adele that she might not see the dreadful thing, but
he was too late.  She shuddered, and drew a quick breath between her
pale lips, but no sound escaped her.

"They have begun already, then," said Onega composedly.  "Well, it will
be our turn next, and we shall show them that we know how to die."

"They have not ill-used us yet," said De Catinat.  "Perhaps they will
keep us for ransom or exchange."

The Indian woman shook her head.  "Do not deceive yourself by any such
hope," said she.  "When they are as gentle as they have been with you it
is ever a sign that you are reserved for the torture.  Your wife will be
married to one of their chiefs, but you and I must die, for you are a
warrior, and I am too old for a squaw."

Married to an Iroquois!  Those dreadful words shot a pang through both
their hearts which no thought of death could have done.  De Catinat's
head dropped forward upon his chest, and he staggered and would have
fallen had Adele not caught him by the arm.

"Do not fear, dear Amory," she whispered.  "Other things may happen but
not that, for I swear to you that I shall not survive you.  No, it may
be sin or it may not, but if death will not come to me, I will go to
it."

De Catinat looked down at the gentle face which had set now into the
hard lines of an immutable resolve.  He knew that it would be as she had
said, and that, come what might, that last outrage would not befall
them.  Could he ever have believed that the time would come when it
would send a thrill of joy through his heart to know that his wife would
die?

As they entered the Iroquois village the squaws and warriors had rushed
towards them, and they passed through a double line of hideous faces
which jeered and jibed and howled at them as they passed.  Their escort
led them through this rabble and conducted them to a hut which stood
apart.  It was empty, save for some willow fishing-nets hanging at the
side, and a heap of pumpkins stored in the corner.

"The chiefs will come and will decide upon what is to be done with us,"
said Onega.  "Here they are coming now, and you will soon see that I am
right, for I know the ways of my own people."

An instant later an old war-chief, accompanied by two younger braves and
by the bearded half-Dutch Iroquois who had led the attack upon the
manor-house, strolled over and stood in the doorway, looking in at the
prisoners, and shooting little guttural sentences at each other.
The totems of the Hawk, the Wolf, the Bear, and the Snake showed that
they each represented one of the great families of the Nation.
The Bastard was smoking a stone pipe, and yet it was he who talked the
most, arguing apparently with one of the younger savages, who seemed to
come round at last to his opinion.  Finally the old chief said a few
short stern words, and the matter appeared to be settled.

"And you, you beldame," said the Bastard in French to the Iroquois
woman, "you will have a lesson this night which will teach you to side
against your own people."

"You half-bred mongrel," replied the fearless old woman, "you should
take that hat from your head when you speak to one in whose veins runs
the best blood of the Onondagas.  You a warrior?  You who, with a
thousand at your back, could not make your way into a little house with
a few poor husbandmen within it!  It is no wonder that your father's
people have cast you out!  Go back and work at the beads, or play at the
game of plum-stones, for some day in the woods you might meet with a
man, and so bring disgrace upon the nation which has taken you in!"

The evil face of the Bastard grew livid as he listened to the scornful
words which were hissed at him by the captive.  He strode across to her,
and taking her hand he thrust her forefinger into the burning bowl of
his pipe.  She made no effort to remove it, but sat with a perfectly set
face for a minute or more, looking out through the open door at the
evening sunlight and the little groups of chattering Indians.  He had
watched her keenly in the hope of hearing a cry, or seeing some spasm of
agony upon her face, but at last, with a curse, he dashed down her hand
and strode from the hut.  She thrust her charred finger into her bosom
and laughed.

"He is a good-for-nought!" she cried.  "He does not even know how to
torture.  Now, I could have got a cry out of him.  I am sure of it.
But you--monsieur, you are very white!"

"It was the sight of such a hellish deed.  Ah, if we were but set face
to face, I with my sword, he with what weapon he chose, by God, he
should pay for it with his heart's blood."

The Indian woman seemed surprised.  "It is strange to me," she said,
"that you should think of what befalls me when you are yourselves under
the same shadow.  But our fate will be as I said."

"Ah!"

"You and I are to die at the stake.  She is to be given to the dog who
has left us."

"Ah!"

"Adele! Adele!  What shall I do!"  He tore his hair in his helplessness
and distraction.

"No, no, fear not, Amory, for my heart will not fail me.  What is the
pang of death if it binds us together?"

"The younger chief pleaded for you, saying that the _Mitche Manitou_ had
stricken you with madness, as could be seen by your swimming to their
canoe, and that a blight would fall upon the nation if you were led to
the stake.  But this Bastard said that love came often like madness
among the pale-faces, and that it was that alone which had driven you.
Then it was agreed that you should die and that she should go to his
wigwam, since he had led the war-party.  As for me, their hearts were
bitter against me, and I also am to die by the pine splinters."

De Catinat breathed a prayer that he might meet his fate like a soldier
and a gentleman.

"When is it to be?" he asked.

"Now!  At once!  They have gone to make all ready!  But you have time
yet, for I am to go first."

"Amory, Amory, could we not die together now?" cried Adele, throwing her
arms round her husband.  "If it be sin, it is surely a sin which will be
forgiven us.  Let us go, dear.  Let us leave these dreadful people and
this cruel world and turn where we shall find peace."

The Indian woman's eyes flashed with satisfaction.

"You have spoken well, White Lily," said she.  "Why should you wait
until it is their pleasure to pluck you.  See, already the glare of
their fire beats upon the tree-trunks, and you can hear the howlings of
those who thirst for your blood.  If you die by your own hands, they
will be robbed of their spectacle, and their chief will have lost his
bride.  So you will be the victors in the end, and they the vanquished.
You have said rightly, White Lily.  There lies the only path for you!"

"But how to take it?"

Onega glanced keenly at the two warriors who stood as sentinels at the
door of the hut.  They had turned away, absorbed in the horrible
preparations which were going on.  Then she rummaged deeply within the
folds of her loose gown and pulled out a small pistol with two brass
barrels and double triggers in the form of winged dragons.  It was only
a toy to look at, all carved and scrolled and graven with the choicest
work of the Paris gunsmith.  For its beauty the seigneur had bought it
at his last visit to Quebec, and yet it might be useful, too, and it was
loaded in both barrels.

"I meant to use it on myself," said she, as she slipped it into the hand
of De Catinat.  "But now I am minded to show them that I can die as an
Onondaga should die, and that I am worthy to have the blood of their
chiefs in my veins.  Take it, for I swear that I will not use it myself,
unless it be to fire both bullets into that Bastard's heart."

A flush of joy shot over De Catinat as his fingers closed round the
pistol.  Here was indeed a key to unlock the gates of peace.  Adele laid
her cheek against his shoulder and laughed with pleasure.

"You will forgive me, dear," he whispered.

"Forgive you!  I bless you, and love you with my whole heart and soul.
Clasp me close, darling, and say one prayer before you do it."

They had sunk on their knees together when three warriors entered the
hut and said a few abrupt words to their country-woman.  She rose with a
smile.

"They are waiting for me," said she.  "You shall see, White Lily, and
you also, monsieur, how well I know what is due to my position.
Farewell, and remember Onega!"

She smiled again, and walked from the hut amidst the warriors with the
quick firm step of a queen who sweeps to a throne.

"Now, Amory!" whispered Adele, closing her eyes, and nestling still
closer to him.

He raised the pistol, and then, with a quick sudden intaking of the
breath, he dropped it, and knelt with glaring eyes looking up at a tree
which faced the open door of the hut.

It was a beech-tree, exceedingly old and gnarled, with its bark hanging
down in strips and its whole trunk spotted with moss and mould.
Some ten feet above the ground the main trunk divided into two, and in
the fork thus formed a hand had suddenly appeared, a large reddish hand,
which shook frantically from side to side in passionate dissuasion.
The next instant, as the two captives still stared in amazement, the
hand disappeared behind the trunk again and a face appeared in its
place, which still shook from side to side as resolutely as its
forerunner.  It was impossible to mistake that mahogany, wrinkled skin,
the huge bristling eyebrows, or the little glistening eyes.  It was
Captain Ephraim Savage of Boston!

And even as they stared and wondered a sudden shrill whistle burst out
from the depths of the forest, and in a moment every bush and thicket
and patch of brushwood were spouting fire and smoke, while the snarl of
the musketry ran round the whole glade, and the storm of bullets whizzed
and pelted among the yelling savages.  The Iroquois' sentinels had been
drawn in by their bloodthirsty craving to see the prisoners die, and now
the Canadians were upon them, and they were hemmed in by a ring of fire.
First one way and then another they rushed, to be met always by the same
blast of death, until finding at last some gap in the attack they
streamed through, like sheep through a broken fence, and rushed madly
away through the forest, with the bullets of their pursuers still
singing about their ears, until the whistle sounded again to recall the
woodsmen from the chase.

But there was one savage who had found work to do before he fled.
The Flemish Bastard had preferred his vengeance to his safety!
Rushing at Onega, he buried his tomahawk in her brain, and then, yelling
his war-cry, he waved the blood-stained weapon above his head, and flew
into the hut where the prisoners still knelt.  De Catinat saw him
coming, and a mad joy glistened in his eyes.  He rose to meet him, and
as he rushed in he fired both barrels of his pistol into the Bastard's
face.  An instant later a swarm of Canadians had rushed over the
writhing bodies, the captives felt warm friendly hands which grasped
their own, and looking upon the smiling, well-known faces of Amos Green,
Savage, and Du Lhut, they knew that peace had come to them at last.

And so the refugees came to the end of the toils of their journey, for
that winter was spent by them in peace at Fort St. Louis, and in the
spring, the Iroquois having carried the war to the Upper St. Lawrence,
the travellers were able to descend into the English provinces, and so
to make their way down the Hudson to New York, where a warm welcome
awaited them from the family of Amos Green.  The friendship between the
two men was now so cemented together by common memories and common
danger that they soon became partners in fur-trading, and the name of
the Frenchman came at last to be as familiar in the mountains of Maine
and on the slopes of the Alleghanies as it had once been in the _salons_
and corridors of Versailles.  In time De Catinat built a house on Staten
Island, where many of his fellow-refugees had settled, and much of what
he won from his fur-trading was spent in the endeavour to help his
struggling Huguenot brothers.  Amos Green had married a Dutch maiden of
Schenectady, and as Adele and she became inseparable friends, the
marriage served to draw closer the ties of love which held the two
families together.

As to Captain Ephraim Savage, he returned safely to his beloved Boston,
where he fulfilled his ambition by building himself a fair brick house
upon the rising ground in the northern part of the city, whence he could
look down both upon the shipping in the river and the bay.  There he
lived, much respected by his townsfolk, who made him selectman and
alderman, and gave him the command of a goodly ship when Sir William
Phips made his attack upon Quebec, and found that the old Lion Frontenac
was not to be driven from his lair.  So, honoured by all, the old seaman
lived to an age which carried him deep into the next century, when he
could already see with his dim eyes something of the growing greatness
of his country.

The manor-house of Sainte Marie was soon restored to its former
prosperity, but its seigneur was from the day that he lost his wife and
son a changed man.  He grew leaner, fiercer, less human, forever heading
parties which made their way into the Iroquois woods and which
outrivalled the savages themselves in the terrible nature of their
deeds.  A day came at last when he sallied out upon one of these
expeditions, from which neither he nor any of his men ever returned.
Many a terrible secret is hid by those silent woods, and the fate of
Charles de la Noue, Seigneur de Sainte Marie, is among them.



NOTE ON THE HUGUENOTS AND THEIR DISPERSION.


Towards the latter quarter of the seventeenth century there was hardly
an important industry in France which was not controlled by the
Huguenots, so that, numerous as they were, their importance was out of
all proportion to their numbers.  The cloth trade of the north and the
south-east, the manufacture of serges and light stuffs in Languedoc, the
linen trade of Normandy and Brittany, the silk and velvet industry of
Tours and Lyons, the glass of Normandy, the paper of Auvergne and
Angoumois, the jewellery of the Isle of France, the tan yards of
Touraine, the iron and tin work of the Sedanais--all these were largely
owned and managed by Huguenots.  The numerous Saint days of the Catholic
Calendar handicapped their rivals, and it was computed that the
Protestant worked 310 days in the year to his fellow-countryman's 260.

A very large number of the Huguenot refugees were brought back, and the
jails and galleys of France were crowded with them.  One hundred
thousand settled in Friesland and Holland, 25,000 in Switzerland, 75,000
in Germany, and 50,000 in England.  Some made their way even to the
distant Cape of Good Hope, where they remained in the Paarl district.

In war, as in industry, the exiles were a source of strength to the
countries which received them.  Frenchmen drilled the Russian armies of
Peter the Great, a Huguenot Count became commander-in-chief in Denmark,
and Schomberg led the army of Brandenburg, and afterwards that of
England.

In England three Huguenot regiments were formed for the service
of William.  The exiles established themselves as silk workers in
Spitalfields, cotton spinners at Bideford, tapestry weavers at Exeter,
wool carders at Taunton, kersey makers at Norwich, weavers at
Canterbury, bat makers at Wandsworth, sailcloth makers at Ipswich,
workers in calico in Bromley, glass in Sussex, paper at Laverstock,
cambric at Edinburgh.

Early Protestant refugees had taken refuge in America twenty years
before the revocation, where they formed a colony at Staten Island.
A body came to Boston in 1684, and were given 11,000 acres at Oxford,
by order of the General Court at Massachusetts.  In New York and
Long Island colonies sprang up, and later in Virginia (the Monacan
Settlement), in Maryland, and in South Carolina (French Santee and
Orange Quarter).



NOTE ON THE FUTURE OF LOUIS, MADAMS DE MAINTENON, AND MADAME DE
MONTESPAN.


It has been left to our own century to clear the fair fame of Madame de
Maintenon of all reproach, and to show her as what she was, a pure woman
and a devoted wife.  She has received little justice from the memoir
writers of the seventeenth century, most of whom, the Duc de St. Simon,
for example, and the Princess Elizabeth of Bavaria, had their own
private reasons for disliking her.  An admirable epitome of her
character and influence will be found in Dr. Dollinger's _Historical
Studies_.  She made Louis an excellent wife, waited upon him assiduously
for thirty years of married life, influenced him constantly towards
good--save only in the one instance of the Huguenots, and finally died
very shortly after her husband.

Madame de Montespan lived in great magnificence after the triumph of her
rival, and spent freely the vast sums which the king's generosity had
furnished her with.  Eventually, having exhausted all that this world
could offer, she took to hair-shirts and nail-studded girdles, in the
hope of securing a good position in the next.  Her horror of death was
excessive.  In thunderstorms she sat with a little child in her lap, in
the hope that its innocence might shield her from the lightning. She
slept always with her room ablaze with tapers, and with several women
watching by the side of her couch.  When at last the inevitable arrived
she left her body for the family tomb, her heart to the convent of La
Fleche, and her entrails to the priory of Menoux near Bourbon.
These latter were thrust into a box and given to a peasant to convey to
the priory.  Curiosity induced him to look into the box upon the way,
and, seeing the contents, he supposed himself to be the victim of a
practical joke, and emptied them out into a ditch.  A swineherd was
passing at the moment with his pigs, and so it happened that, in the
words of Mrs.  Julia Pardoe, "in a few minutes the most filthy animals
in creation had devoured portions of the remains of one of the
haughtiest women who ever trod the earth."

Louis, after a reign of more than fifty years, which comprised the most
brilliant epoch of French history, died at last in 1715 amidst the
saddest surroundings.

One by one those whom he loved had preceded him to the grave, his
brother, his son, the two sons of his son, their wives, and finally his
favourite great-grandson, until he, the old dying monarch, with his
rouge and his stays, was left with only a little infant in arms, the Duc
D'Anjou, three generations away from him, to perpetuate his line.
On 20th August, 1715, he was attacked by senile gangrene, which
gradually spread up the leg until on the 30th it became fatal.
His dying words were worthy of his better self.  "Gentlemen, I desire
your pardon for the bad example which I have set you.  I have greatly to
thank you fur the manner in which you have served me, as well as for the
attachment and fidelity which I have always experienced at your hands.
I request from you the same zeal and fidelity for my grandson.
Farewell, gentlemen.  I feel that this parting has affected not only
myself but you also.  Forgive me!  I trust that you will sometimes think
of me when I am gone."

The Exploits of BRIGADIER GERARD


SIR ARTHUR CONAN DOYLE




_This book is published by arrangement with the Estate of the late Sir
Arthur Conan Doyle_



1896



BY SIR ARTHUR CONAN DOYLE

_The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes_
_The Case-Book of Sherlock Holmes_
_The Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes_
_The Return of Sherlock Holmes_
_His Last Bow_
_The Hound of the Baskervilles_
_The Sign of Four_
_The Valley of Fear_
_Sir Nigel_
_The White Company_
_Micah Clarke_
_The Refugees_
_Rodney Stone_
_Uncle Bernac_
_Adventures of Gerard_
_The Exploits of Brigadier Gerard_
_The Lost World_
_The Tragedy of the Korosko_


OMNIBUS VOLUMES

_Great Stories_
_The Conan Doyle Stories_
_The Sherlock Holmes Short Stories_
_The Sherlock Holmes Long Stories_
_The Historical Romances_
_The Complete Professor Challenger Stories_
_The Complete Napoleonic Stories_

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Life of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle_

by John Dickson Carr

       *       *       *       *       *




CONTENTS

1. How the Brigadier came to the Castle of Gloom

2. How the Brigadier slew the brothers of Ajaccio

3. How the Brigadier held the King

4. How the King held the Brigadier

5. How the Brigadier took the field against the Marshal Millefleurs

6. How the Brigadier played for a kingdom

7. How the Brigadier won his Medal

8. How the Brigadier was tempted by the Devil




1. HOW THE BRIGADIER CAME TO THE CASTLE OF GLOOM[A]


You do very well, my friends, to treat me with some little reverence,
for in honouring me you are honouring both France and yourselves. It is
not merely an old, grey-moustached officer whom you see eating his
omelette or draining his glass, but it is a fragment of history. In me
you see one of the last of those wonderful men, the men who were
veterans when they were yet boys, who learned to use a sword earlier
than a razor, and who during a hundred battles had never once let the
enemy see the colour of their knapsacks. For twenty years we were
teaching Europe how to fight, and even when they had learned their
lesson it was only the thermometer, and never the bayonet, which could
break the Grand Army down. Berlin, Naples, Vienna, Madrid, Lisbon,
Moscow--we stabled our horses in them all. Yes, my friends, I say again
that you do well to send your children to me with flowers, for these
ears have heard the trumpet calls of France, and these eyes have seen
her standards in lands where they may never be seen again.

Even now, when I doze in my arm-chair, I can see those great warriors
stream before me--the green-jacketed chasseurs, the giant cuirassiers,
Poniatowsky's lancers, the white-mantled dragoons, the nodding bearskins
of the horse grenadiers. And then there comes the thick, low rattle of
the drums, and through wreaths of dust and smoke I see the line of high
bonnets, the row of brown faces, the swing and toss of the long, red
plumes amid the sloping lines of steel. And there rides Ney with his red
head, and Lefebvre with his bulldog jaw, and Lannes with his Gascon
swagger; and then amidst the gleam of brass and the flaunting feathers I
catch a glimpse of _him_, the man with the pale smile, the rounded
shoulders, and the far-off eyes. There is an end of my sleep, my
friends, for up I spring from my chair, with a cracked voice calling and
a silly hand outstretched, so that Madame Titaux has one more laugh at
the old fellow who lives among the shadows.

Although I was a full Chief of Brigade when the wars came to an end, and
had every hope of soon being made a General of Division, it is still
rather to my earlier days that I turn when I wish to talk of the glories
and the trials of a soldier's life. For you will understand that when an
officer has so many men and horses under him, he has his mind full of
recruits and remounts, fodder and farriers, and quarters, so that even
when he is not in the face of the enemy, life is a very serious matter
for him. But when he is only a lieutenant or a captain he has nothing
heavier than his epaulettes upon his shoulders, so that he can clink his
spurs and swing his dolman, drain his glass and kiss his girl, thinking
of nothing save of enjoying a gallant life. That is the time when he is
likely to have adventures, and it is often to that time that I shall
turn in the stories which I may have for you. So it will be tonight when
I tell you of my visit to the Castle of Gloom; of the strange mission of
Sub-Lieutenant Duroc, and of the horrible affair of the man who was once
known as Jean Carabin, and afterwards as the Baron Straubenthal.

You must know, then, that in the February of 1807, immediately after the
taking of Danzig, Major Legendre and I were commissioned to bring four
hundred remounts from Prussia into Eastern Poland.

The hard weather, and especially the great battle at Eylau, had killed
so many of the horses that there was some danger of our beautiful Tenth
of Hussars becoming a battalion of light infantry. We knew, therefore,
both the Major and I, that we should be very welcome at the front. We
did not advance very rapidly, however, for the snow was deep, the roads
detestable, and we had but twenty returning invalids to assist us.
Besides, it is impossible, when you have a daily change of forage, and
sometimes none at all, to move horses faster than a walk. I am aware
that in the story-books the cavalry whirls past at the maddest of
gallops; but for my own part, after twelve campaigns, I should be very
satisfied to know that my brigade could always walk upon the march and
trot in the presence of the enemy. This I say of the hussars and
chasseurs, mark you, so that it is far more the case with cuirassiers or
dragoons.

For myself I am fond of horses, and to have four hundred of them, of
every age and shade and character, all under my own hands, was a very
great pleasure to me. They were from Pomerania for the most part, though
some were from Normandy and some from Alsace, and it amused us to notice
that they differed in character as much as the people of those
provinces. We observed also, what I have often proved since, that the
nature of a horse can be told by his colour, from the coquettish light
bay, full of fancies and nerves, to the hardy chestnut, and from the
docile roan to the pig-headed rusty-black. All this has nothing in the
world to do with my story, but how is an officer of cavalry to get on
with his tale when he finds four hundred horses waiting for him at the
outset? It is my habit, you see, to talk of that which interests myself
and so I hope that I may interest you.

We crossed the Vistula opposite Marienwerder, and had got as far as
Riesenberg, when Major Legendre came into my room in the post-house with
an open paper in his hand.

'You are to leave me,' said he, with despair upon his face.

It was no very great grief to me to do that, for he was, if I may say
so, hardly worthy to have such a subaltern. I saluted, however, in
silence.

'It is an order from General Lasalle,' he continued; 'you are to
proceed to Rossel instantly, and to report yourself at the headquarters
of the regiment.'

No message could have pleased me better. I was already very well thought
of by my superior officers. It was evident to me, therefore, that this
sudden order meant that the regiment was about to see service once more,
and that Lasalle understood how incomplete my squadron would be without
me. It is true that it came at an inconvenient moment, for the keeper of
the post-house had a daughter--one of those ivory-skinned, black-haired
Polish girls--with whom I had hoped to have some further talk. Still, it
is not for the pawn to argue when the fingers of the player move him
from the square; so down I went, saddled my big black charger, Rataplan,
and set off instantly upon my lonely journey.

My word, it was a treat for those poor Poles and Jews, who have so
little to brighten their dull lives, to see such a picture as that
before their doors! The frosty morning air made Rataplan's great black
limbs and the beautiful curves of his back and sides gleam and shimmer
with every gambade. As for me, the rattle of hoofs upon a road, and the
jingle of bridle chains which comes with every toss of a saucy head,
would even now set my blood dancing through my veins. You may think,
then, how I carried myself in my five-and-twentieth year--I, Etienne
Gerard, the picked horseman and surest blade in the ten regiments of
hussars. Blue was our colour in the Tenth--a sky-blue dolman and pelisse
with a scarlet front--and it was said of us in the army that we could
set a whole population running, the women towards us, and the men away.
There were bright eyes in the Riesenberg windows that morning which
seemed to beg me to tarry; but what can a soldier do, save to kiss his
hand and shake his bridle as he rides upon his way?

It was a bleak season to ride through the poorest and ugliest country in
Europe, but there was a cloudless sky above, and a bright, cold sun,
which shimmered on the huge snowfields. My breath reeked into the
frosty air, and Rataplan sent up two feathers of steam from his
nostrils, while the icicles drooped from the side-irons of his bit. I
let him trot to warm his limbs, while for my own part I had too much to
think of to give much heed to the cold. To north and south stretched the
great plains, mottled over with dark clumps of fir and lighter patches
of larch. A few cottages peeped out here and there, but it was only
three months since the Grand Army had passed that way, and you know what
that meant to a country. The Poles were our friends, it was true, but
out of a hundred thousand men, only the Guard had waggons, and the rest
had to live as best they might. It did not surprise me, therefore, to
see no signs of cattle and no smoke from the silent houses. A weal had
been left across the country where the great host had passed, and it was
said that even the rats were starved wherever the Emperor had led his
men.

By midday I had got as far as the village of Saalfeldt, but as I was on
the direct road for Osterode, where the Emperor was wintering, and also
for the main camp of the seven divisions of infantry, the highway was
choked with carriages and carts. What with artillery caissons and
waggons and couriers, and the ever-thickening stream of recruits and
stragglers, it seemed to me that it would be a very long time before I
should join my comrades. The plains, however, were five feet deep in
snow, so there was nothing for it but to plod upon our way. It was with
joy, therefore, that I found a second road which branched away from the
other, trending through a fir-wood towards the north. There was a small
auberge at the cross-roads, and a patrol of the Third Hussars of
Conflans--the very regiment of which I was afterwards colonel--were
mounting their horses at the door. On the steps stood their officer, a
slight, pale young man, who looked more like a young priest from a
seminary than a leader of the devil-may-care rascals before him.

'Good-day, sir,' said he, seeing that I pulled up my horse.

'Good-day,' I answered. 'I am Lieutenant Etienne Gerard, of the Tenth.'

I could see by his face that he had heard of me. Everybody had heard of
me since my duel with the six fencing masters. My manner, however,
served to put him at his ease with me.

'I am Sub-Lieutenant Duroc, of the Third,' said he.

'Newly joined?' I asked.

'Last week.'

I had thought as much, from his white face and from the way in which he
let his men lounge upon their horses. It was not so long, however, since
I had learned myself what it was like when a schoolboy has to give
orders to veteran troopers. It made me blush, I remember, to shout
abrupt commands to men who had seen more battles than I had years, and
it would have come more natural for me to say, 'With your permission, we
shall now wheel into line,' or, 'If you think it best, we shall trot.' I
did not think the less of the lad, therefore, when I observed that his
men were somewhat out of hand, but I gave them a glance which stiffened
them in their saddles.

'May I ask, monsieur, whether you are going by this northern road?' I
asked.

'My orders are to patrol it as far as Arensdorf,' said he.

'Then I will, with your permission, ride so far with you,' said I. 'It
is very clear that the longer way will be the faster.'

So it proved, for this road led away from the army into a country which
was given over to Cossacks and marauders, and it was as bare as the
other was crowded. Duroc and I rode in front, with our six troopers
clattering in the rear. He was a good boy, this Duroc, with his head
full of the nonsense that they teach at St Cyr, knowing more about
Alexander and Pompey than how to mix a horse's fodder or care for a
horse's feet. Still, he was, as I have said, a good boy, unspoiled as
yet by the camp. It pleased me to hear him prattle away about his
sister Marie and about his mother in Amiens. Presently we found
ourselves at the village of Hayenau. Duroc rode up to the post-house and
asked to see the master.

'Can you tell me,' said he, 'whether the man who calls himself the Baron
Straubenthal lives in these parts?'

The postmaster shook his head, and we rode upon our way. I took no
notice of this, but when, at the next village, my comrade repeated the
same question, with the same result, I could not help asking him who
this Baron Straubenthal might be.

'He is a man,' said Duroc, with a sudden flush upon his boyish face, 'to
whom I have a very important message to convey.'

Well, this was not satisfactory, but there was something in my
companion's manner which told me that any further questioning would be
distasteful to him. I said nothing more, therefore, but Duroc would
still ask every peasant whom we met whether he could give him any news
of the Baron Straubenthal.

For my own part I was endeavouring, as an officer of light cavalry
should, to form an idea of the lay of the country, to note the course of
the streams, and to mark the places where there should be fords. Every
step was taking us farther from the camp round the flanks of which we
were travelling. Far to the south a few plumes of grey smoke in the
frosty air marked the position of some of our outposts. To the north,
however, there was nothing between ourselves and the Russian winter
quarters. Twice on the extreme horizon I caught a glimpse of the glitter
of steel, and pointed it out to my companion. It was too distant for us
to tell whence it came, but we had little doubt that it was from the
lance-heads of marauding Cossacks.

The sun was just setting when we rode over a low hill and saw a small
village upon our right, and on our left a high black castle, which
jutted out from amongst the pine-woods. A farmer with his cart was
approaching us--a matted-haired, downcast fellow, in a sheepskin jacket.

'What village is this?' asked Duroc.

'It is Arensdorf,' he answered, in his barbarous German dialect.

'Then here I am to stay the night,' said my young companion. Then,
turning to the farmer, he asked his eternal question, 'Can you tell me
where the Baron Straubenthal lives?'

'Why, it is he who owns the Castle of Gloom,' said the farmer, pointing
to the dark turrets over the distant fir forest.

Duroc gave a shout like the sportsman who sees his game rising in front
of him. The lad seemed to have gone off his head--his eyes shining, his
face deathly white, and such a grim set about his mouth as made the
farmer shrink away from him. I can see him now, leaning forward on his
brown horse, with his eager gaze fixed upon the great black tower.

'Why do you call it the Castle of Gloom?' I asked.

'Well, it's the name it bears upon the countryside,' said the farmer.
'By all accounts there have been some black doings up yonder. It's not
for nothing that the wickedest man in Poland has been living there these
fourteen years past.'

'A Polish nobleman?' I asked.

'Nay, we breed no such men in Poland,' he answered.

'A Frenchman, then?' cried Duroc.

'They say that he came from France.'

'And with red hair?'

'As red as a fox.'

'Yes, yes, it is my man,' cried my companion, quivering all over in his
excitement. 'It is the hand of Providence which has led me here. Who can
say that there is not justice in this world? Come, Monsieur Gerard, for
I must see the men safely quartered before I can attend to this private
matter.'

He spurred on his horse, and ten minutes later we were at the door of
the inn of Arensdorf, where his men were to find their quarters for the
night.

Well, all this was no affair of mine, and I could not imagine what the
meaning of it might be. Rossel was still far off, but I determined to
ride on for a few hours and take my chance of some wayside barn in which
I could find shelter for Rataplan and myself. I had mounted my horse,
therefore, after tossing off a cup of wine, when young Duroc came
running out of the door and laid his hand upon my knee.

'Monsieur Gerard,' he panted, 'I beg of you not to abandon me like
this!'

'My good sir,' said I, 'if you would tell me what is the matter and what
you would wish me to do, I should be better able to tell you if I could
be of any assistance to you.'

'You can be of the very greatest,' he cried. 'Indeed, from all that I
have heard of you, Monsieur Gerard, you are the one man whom I should
wish to have by my side tonight.'

'You forget that I am riding to join my regiment.'

'You cannot, in any case, reach it tonight. Tomorrow will bring you to
Rossel. By staying with me you will confer the very greatest kindness
upon me, and you will aid me in a matter which concerns my own honour
and the honour of my family. I am compelled, however, to confess to you
that some personal danger may possibly be involved.'

It was a crafty thing for him to say. Of course, I sprang from
Rataplan's back and ordered the groom to lead him back into the stables.

'Come into the inn,' said I, 'and let me know exactly what it is that
you wish me to do.'

He led the way into a sitting-room, and fastened the door lest we should
be interrupted. He was a well-grown lad, and as he stood in the glare of
the lamp, with the light beating upon his earnest face and upon his
uniform of silver grey, which suited him to a marvel, I felt my heart
warm towards him. Without going so far as to say that he carried himself
as I had done at his age, there was at least similarity enough to make
me feel in sympathy with him.

'I can explain it all in a few words,' said he. 'If I have not already
satisfied your very natural curiosity, it is because the subject is so
painful a one to me that I can hardly bring myself to allude to it. I
cannot, however, ask for your assistance without explaining to you
exactly how the matter lies.

'You must know, then, that my father was the well-known banker,
Christophe Duroc, who was murdered by the people during the September
massacres. As you are aware, the mob took possession of the prisons,
chose three so-called judges to pass sentence upon the unhappy
aristocrats, and then tore them to pieces when they were passed out into
the street. My father had been a benefactor of the poor all his life.
There were many to plead for him. He had the fever, too, and was carried
in, half-dead, upon a blanket. Two of the judges were in favour of
acquitting him; the third, a young Jacobin, whose huge body and brutal
mind had made him a leader among these wretches, dragged him, with his
own hands, from the litter, kicked him again and again with his heavy
boots, and hurled him out of the door, where in an instant he was torn
limb from limb under circumstances which are too horrible for me to
describe. This, as you perceive, was murder, even under their own
unlawful laws, for two of their own judges had pronounced in my father's
favour.

'Well, when the days of order came back again, my elder brother began to
make inquiries about this man. I was only a child then, but it was a
family matter, and it was discussed in my presence. The fellow's name
was Carabin. He was one of Sansterre's Guard, and a noted duellist. A
foreign lady named the Baroness Straubenthal having been dragged before
the Jacobins, he had gained her liberty for her on the promise that she
with her money and estates should be his. He had married her, taken her
name and title, and escaped out of France at the time of the fall of
Robespierre. What had become of him we had no means of learning.

'You will think, doubtless, that it would be easy for us to find him,
since we had both his name and his title. You must remember, however,
that the Revolution left us without money, and that without money such a
search is very difficult. Then came the Empire, and it became more
difficult still, for, as you are aware, the Emperor considered that the
18th Brumaire brought all accounts to a settlement, and that on that day
a veil had been drawn across the past. None the less, we kept our own
family story and our own family plans.

'My brother joined the army, and passed with it through all Southern
Europe, asking everywhere for the Baron Straubenthal. Last October he
was killed at Jena, with his mission still unfulfilled. Then it became
my turn, and I have the good fortune to hear of the very man of whom I
am in search at one of the first Polish villages which I have to visit,
and within a fortnight of joining my regiment. And then, to make the
matter even better, I find myself in the company of one whose name is
never mentioned throughout the army save in connection with some daring
and generous deed.'

This was all very well, and I listened to it with the greatest interest,
but I was none the clearer as to what young Duroc wished me to do.

'How can I be of service to you?' I asked.

'By coming up with me.'

'To the Castle?'

'Precisely.'

'When?'

'At once.'

'But what do you intend to do?'

'I shall know what to do. But I wish you to be with me, all the same.'

Well, it was never in my nature to refuse an adventure, and, besides, I
had every sympathy with the lad's feelings. It is very well to forgive
one's enemies, but one wishes to give them something to forgive also. I
held out my hand to him, therefore.

'I must be on my way for Rossel tomorrow morning, but tonight I am
yours,' said I.

We left our troopers in snug quarters, and, as it was but a mile to the
Castle, we did not disturb our horses. To tell the truth, I hate to see
a cavalry man walk, and I hold that just as he is the most gallant thing
upon earth when he has his saddle-flaps between his knees, so he is the
most clumsy when he has to loop up his sabre and his sabre-tasche in one
hand and turn in his toes for fear of catching the rowels of his spurs.
Still, Duroc and I were of the age when one can carry things off, and I
dare swear that no woman at least would have quarrelled with the
appearance of the two young hussars, one in blue and one in grey, who
set out that night from the Arensdorf post-house. We both carried our
swords, and for my own part I slipped a pistol from my holster into the
inside of my pelisse, for it seemed to me that there might be some wild
work before us.

The track which led to the Castle wound through a pitch-black fir-wood,
where we could see nothing save the ragged patch of stars above our
heads. Presently, however, it opened up, and there was the Castle right
in front of us, about as far as a carbine would carry. It was a huge,
uncouth place, and bore every mark of being exceedingly old, with
turrets at every corner, and a square keep on the side which was nearest
to us. In all its great shadow there was no sign of light save from a
single window, and no sound came from it. To me there was something
awful in its size and its silence, which corresponded so well with its
sinister name. My companion pressed on eagerly, and I followed him along
the ill-kept path which led to the gate.

There was no bell or knocker upon the great iron-studded door, and it
was only by pounding with the hilts of our sabres that we could attract
attention. A thin, hawk-faced man, with a beard up to his temples,
opened it at last. He carried a lantern in one hand, and in the other a
chain which held an enormous black hound. His manner at the first moment
was threatening, but the sight of our uniforms and of our faces turned
it into one of sulky reserve.

'The Baron Straubenthal does not receive visitors at so late an hour,'
said he, speaking in very excellent French.

'You can inform Baron Straubenthal that I have come eight hundred
leagues to see him, and that I will not leave until I have done so,'
said my companion. I could not myself have said it with a better voice
and manner.

The fellow took a sidelong look at us, and tugged at his black beard in
his perplexity.

'To tell the truth, gentlemen,' said he, 'the Baron has a cup or two of
wine in him at this hour, and you would certainly find him a more
entertaining companion if you were to come again in the morning.'

He had opened the door a little wider as he spoke, and I saw by the
light of the lamp in the hall behind him that three other rough fellows
were standing there, one of whom held another of these monstrous hounds.
Duroc must have seen it also, but it made no difference to his
resolution.

'Enough talk,' said he, pushing the man to one side. 'It is with your
master that I have to deal.'

The fellows in the hall made way for him as he strode in among them, so
great is the power of one man who knows what he wants over several who
are not sure of themselves. My companion tapped one of them upon the
shoulder with as much assurance as though he owned him.

'Show me to the Baron,' said he.

The man shrugged his shoulders, and answered something in Polish. The
fellow with the beard, who had shut and barred the front door, appeared
to be the only one among them who could speak French.

'Well, you shall have your way,' said he, with a sinister smile. 'You
shall see the Baron. And perhaps, before you have finished, you will
wish that you had taken my advice.'

We followed him down the hall, which was stone-flagged and very
spacious, with skins scattered upon the floor, and the heads of wild
beasts upon the walls. At the farther end he threw open a door, and we
entered.

It was a small room, scantily furnished, with the same marks of neglect
and decay which met us at every turn. The walls were hung with
discoloured tapestry, which had come loose at one corner, so as to
expose the rough stonework behind. A second door, hung with a curtain,
faced us upon the other side. Between lay a square table, strewn with
dirty dishes and the sordid remains of a meal. Several bottles were
scattered over it. At the head of it, and facing us, there sat a huge
man with a lion-like head and a great shock of orange-coloured hair. His
beard was of the same glaring hue; matted and tangled and coarse as a
horse's mane. I have seen some strange faces in my time, but never one
more brutal than that, with its small, vicious, blue eyes, its white,
crumpled cheeks, and the thick, hanging lip which protruded over his
monstrous beard. His head swayed about on his shoulders, and he looked
at us with the vague, dim gaze of a drunken man. Yet he was not so drunk
but that our uniforms carried their message to him.

'Well, my brave boys,' he hiccoughed. 'What is the latest news from
Paris, eh? You're going to free Poland, I hear, and have meantime all
become slaves yourselves--slaves to a little aristocrat with his grey
coat and his three-cornered hat. No more citizens either, I am told, and
nothing but monsieur and madame. My faith, some more heads will have to
roll into the sawdust basket some of these mornings.'

Duroc advanced in silence, and stood by the ruffian's side.

'Jean Carabin,' said he.

The Baron started, and the film of drunkenness seemed to be clearing
from his eyes.

'Jean Carabin,' said Duroc, once more.

He sat up and grasped the arms of his chair.

'What do you mean by repeating that name, young man?' he asked.

'Jean Carabin, you are a man whom I have long wished to meet.'

'Supposing that I once had such a name, how can it concern you, since
you must have been a child when I bore it?'

'My name is Duroc.'

'Not the son of----?'

'The son of the man you murdered.'

The Baron tried to laugh, but there was terror in his eyes.

'We must let bygones be bygones, young man,' he cried. 'It was our life
or theirs in those days: the aristocrats or the people. Your father was
of the Gironde. He fell. I was of the mountain. Most of my comrades
fell. It was all the fortune of war. We must forget all this and learn
to know each other better, you and I.' He held out a red, twitching hand
as he spoke.

'Enough,' said young Duroc. 'If I were to pass my sabre through you as
you sit in that chair, I should do what is just and right. I dishonour
my blade by crossing it with yours. And yet you are a Frenchman, and
have even held a commission under the same flag as myself. Rise, then,
and defend yourself!'

'Tut, tut!' cried the Baron. 'It is all very well for you young
bloods--'

Duroc's patience could stand no more. He swung his open hand into the
centre of the great orange beard. I saw a lip fringed with blood, and
two glaring blue eyes above it.

'You shall die for that blow.'

'That is better,' said Duroc.

'My sabre!' cried the other. 'I will not keep you waiting, I promise
you!' and he hurried from the room.

I have said that there was a second door covered with a curtain. Hardly
had the Baron vanished when there ran from behind it a woman, young and
beautiful. So swiftly and noiselessly did she move that she was between
us in an instant, and it was only the shaking curtains which told us
whence she had come.

'I have seen it all,' she cried. 'Oh, sir, you have carried yourself
splendidly.' She stooped to my companion's hand, and kissed it again and
again ere he could disengage it from her grasp.

'Nay, madame, why should you kiss my hand?' he cried.

'Because it is the hand which struck him on his vile, lying mouth.
Because it may be the hand which will avenge my mother. I am his
step-daughter. The woman whose heart he broke was my mother. I loathe
him, I fear him. Ah, there is his step!' In an instant she had vanished
as suddenly as she had come. A moment later, the Baron entered with a
drawn sword in his hand, and the fellow who had admitted us at his
heels.

'This is my secretary,' said he. 'He will be my friend in this affair.
But we shall need more elbow-room than we can find here. Perhaps you
will kindly come with me to a more spacious apartment.'

It was evidently impossible to fight in a chamber which was blocked by a
great table. We followed him out, therefore, into the dimly-lit hall. At
the farther end a light was shining through an open door.

'We shall find what we want in here,' said the man with the dark beard.
It was a large, empty room, with rows of barrels and cases round the
walls. A strong lamp stood upon a shelf in the corner. The floor was
level and true, so that no swordsman could ask for more. Duroc drew his
sabre and sprang into it. The Baron stood back with a bow and motioned
me to follow my companion. Hardly were my heels over the threshold when
the heavy door crashed behind us and the key screamed in the lock. We
were taken in a trap.

For a moment we could not realize it. Such incredible baseness was
outside all our experiences. Then, as we understood how foolish we had
been to trust for an instant a man with such a history, a flush of rage
came over us, rage against his villainy and against our own stupidity.
We rushed at the door together, beating it with our fists and kicking
with our heavy boots. The sound of our blows and of our execrations must
have resounded through the Castle. We called to this villain, hurling at
him every name which might pierce even into his hardened soul. But the
door was enormous--such a door as one finds in mediaeval castles--made
of huge beams clamped together with iron. It was as easy to break as a
square of the Old Guard. And our cries appeared to be of as little avail
as our blows, for they only brought for answer the clattering echoes
from the high roof above us. When you have done some soldiering, you
soon learn to put up with what cannot be altered. It was I, then, who
first recovered my calmness, and prevailed upon Duroc to join with me in
examining the apartment which had become our dungeon.

There was only one window, which had no glass in it, and was so narrow
that one could not so much as get one's head through. It was high up,
and Duroc had to stand upon a barrel in order to see from it.

'What can you see?' I asked.

'Fir-woods and an avenue of snow between them,' said he. 'Ah!' he gave a
cry of surprise.

I sprang upon the barrel beside him. There was, as he said, a long,
clear strip of snow in front. A man was riding down it, flogging his
horse and galloping like a madman. As we watched, he grew smaller and
smaller, until he was swallowed up by the black shadows of the forest.

'What does that mean?' asked Duroc.

'No good for us,' said I. 'He may have gone for some brigands to cut
our throats. Let us see if we cannot find a way out of this mouse-trap
before the cat can arrive.'

The one piece of good fortune in our favour was that beautiful lamp. It
was nearly full of oil, and would last us until morning. In the dark our
situation would have been far more difficult. By its light we proceeded
to examine the packages and cases which lined the walls. In some places
there was only a single line of them, while in one corner they were
piled nearly to the ceiling. It seemed that we were in the storehouse of
the Castle, for there were a great number of cheeses, vegetables of
various kinds, bins full of dried fruits, and a line of wine barrels.
One of these had a spigot in it, and as I had eaten little during the
day, I was glad of a cup of claret and some food. As to Duroc, he would
take nothing, but paced up and down the room in a fever of anger and
impatience. 'I'll have him yet!' he cried, every now and then. 'The
rascal shall not escape me!'

This was all very well, but it seemed to me, as I sat on a great round
cheese eating my supper, that this youngster was thinking rather too
much of his own family affairs and too little of the fine scrape into
which he had got me. After all, his father had been dead fourteen years,
and nothing could set that right; but here was Etienne Gerard, the most
dashing lieutenant in the whole Grand Army, in imminent danger of being
cut off at the very outset of his brilliant career. Who was ever to know
the heights to which I might have risen if I were knocked on the head in
this hole-and-corner business, which had nothing whatever to do with
France or the Emperor? I could not help thinking what a fool I had been,
when I had a fine war before me and everything which a man could desire,
to go off on a hare-brained expedition of this sort, as if it were not
enough to have a quarter of a million Russians to fight against, without
plunging into all sorts of private quarrels as well.

'That is all very well,' I said at last, as I heard Duroc muttering his
threats. 'You may do what you like to him when you get the upper hand.
At present the question rather is, what is _he_ going to do to us?'

'Let him do his worst!' cried the boy. 'I owe a duty to my father.'

'That is mere foolishness,' said I. 'If you owe a duty to your father, I
owe one to my mother, which is to get out of this business safe and
sound.'

My remark brought him to his senses.

'I have thought too much of myself!' he cried. 'Forgive me, Monsieur
Gerard. Give me your advice as to what I should do.'

'Well,' said I, 'it is not for our health that they have shut us up here
among the cheeses. They mean to make an end of us if they can. That is
certain. They hope that no one knows that we have come here, and that
none will trace us if we remain. Do your hussars know where you have
gone to?'

'I said nothing.'

'Hum! It is clear that we cannot be starved here. They must come to us
if they are to kill us. Behind a barricade of barrels we could hold our
own against the five rascals whom we have seen. That is, probably, why
they have sent that messenger for assistance.'

'We must get out before he returns.'

'Precisely, if we are to get out at all.'

'Could we not burn down this door?' he cried.

'Nothing could be easier,' said I. 'There are several casks of oil in
the corner. My only objection is that we should ourselves be nicely
toasted, like two little oyster pâtés.'

'Can you not suggest something?' he cried, in despair. 'Ah, what is
that?'

There had been a low sound at our little window, and a shadow came
between the stars and ourselves. A small, white hand was stretched into
the lamplight. Something glittered between the fingers.

'Quick! quick!' cried a woman's voice.

We were on the barrel in an instant.

'They have sent for the Cossacks. Your lives are at stake. Ah, I am
lost! I am lost!'

There was the sound of rushing steps, a hoarse oath, a blow, and the
stars were once more twinkling through the window. We stood helpless
upon the barrel with our blood cold with horror. Half a minute
afterwards we heard a smothered scream, ending in a choke. A great door
slammed somewhere in the silent night.

'Those ruffians have seized her. They will kill her,' I cried.

Duroc sprang down with the inarticulate shouts of one whose reason has
left him. He struck the door so frantically with his naked hands that he
left a blotch of blood with every blow.

Here is the key!' I shouted, picking one from the floor. 'She must have
thrown it in at the instant that she was torn away.'

My companion snatched it from me with a shriek of joy. A moment later he
dashed it down upon the boards. It was so small that it was lost in the
enormous lock. Duroc sank upon one of the boxes with his head between
his hands. He sobbed in his despair. I could have sobbed, too, when I
thought of the woman and how helpless we were to save her.

But I am not easily baffled. After all, this key must have been sent to
us for a purpose. The lady could not bring us that of the door, because
this murderous step-father of hers would most certainly have it in his
pocket. Yet this other must have a meaning, or why should she risk her
life to place it in our hands? It would say little for our wits if we
could not find out what that meaning might be.

I set to work moving all the cases out from the wall, and Duroc, gaining
new hope from my courage, helped me with all his strength. It was no
light task, for many of them were large and heavy. On we went, working
like maniacs, slinging barrels, cheeses, and boxes pell-mell into the
middle of the room. At last there only remained one huge barrel of
vodka, which stood in the corner. With our united strength we rolled it
out, and there was a little low wooden door in the wainscot behind it.
The key fitted, and with a cry of delight we saw it swing open before
us. With the lamp in my hand, I squeezed my way in, followed by my
companion.

We were in the powder-magazine of the Castle--a rough, walled cellar,
with barrels all round it, and one with the top staved in in the centre.
The powder from it lay in a black heap upon the floor. Beyond there was
another door, but it was locked.

'We are no better off than before,' cried Duroc. 'We have no key.'

'We have a dozen!' I cried.

'Where?'

I pointed to the line of powder barrels.

'You would blow this door open?'

'Precisely.'

'But you would explode the magazine.'

It was true, but I was not at the end of my resources.

'We will blow open the store-room door,' I cried.

I ran back and seized a tin box which had been filled with candles. It
was about the size of my busby--large enough to hold several pounds of
powder. Duroc filled it while I cut off the end of a candle. When we had
finished, it would have puzzled a colonel of engineers to make a better
petard. I put three cheeses on the top of each other and placed it above
them, so as to lean against the lock. Then we lit our candle-end and ran
for shelter, shutting the door of the magazine behind us.

It is no joke, my friends, to be among all those tons of powder, with
the knowledge that if the flame of the explosion should penetrate
through one thin door our blackened limbs would be shot higher than the
Castle keep. Who could have believed that a half-inch of candle could
take so long to burn? My ears were straining all the time for the
thudding of the hoofs of the Cossacks who were coming to destroy us. I
had almost made up my mind that the candle must have gone out when there
was a smack like a bursting bomb, our door flew to bits, and pieces of
cheese, with a shower of turnips, apples, and splinters of cases, were
shot in among us. As we rushed out we had to stagger through an
impenetrable smoke, with all sorts of débris beneath our feet, but there
was a glimmering square where the dark door had been. The petard had
done its work.

In fact, it had done more for us than we had even ventured to hope. It
had shattered gaolers as well as gaol. The first thing that I saw as I
came out into the hall was a man with a butcher's axe in his hand, lying
flat upon his back, with a gaping wound across his forehead. The second
was a huge dog, with two of its legs broken, twisting in agony upon the
floor. As it raised itself up I saw the two broken ends flapping like
flails. At the same instant I heard a cry, and there was Duroc, thrown
against the wall, with the other hound's teeth in his throat. He pushed
it off with his left hand, while again and again he passed his sabre
through its body, but it was not until I blew out its brains with my
pistol that the iron jaws relaxed, and the fierce, bloodshot eyes were
glazed in death.

There was no time for us to pause. A woman's scream from in front--a
scream of mortal terror--told us that even now we might be too late.
There were two other men in the hall, but they cowered away from our
drawn swords and furious faces. The blood was streaming from Duroc's
neck and dyeing the grey fur of his pelisse. Such was the lad's fire,
however, that he shot in front of me, and it was only over his shoulder
that I caught a glimpse of the scene as we rushed into the chamber in
which we had first seen the master of the Castle of Gloom.

The Baron was standing in the middle of the room, his tangled mane
bristling like an angry lion. He was, as I have said, a huge man with
enormous shoulders; and as he stood there, with his face flushed with
rage and his sword advanced, I could not but think that, in spite of all
his villainies, he had a proper figure for a grenadier. The lady lay
cowering in a chair behind him. A weal across one of her white arms and
a dog-whip upon the floor were enough to show that our escape had hardly
been in time to save her from his brutality. He gave a howl like a wolf
as we broke in, and was upon us in an instant, hacking and driving, with
a curse at every blow.

I have already said that the room gave no space for swordsmanship. My
young companion was in front of me in the narrow passage between the
table and the wall, so that I could only look on without being able to
aid him. The lad knew something of his weapon, and was as fierce and
active as a wild cat, but in so narrow a space the weight and strength
of the giant gave him the advantage. Besides, he was an admirable
swordsman. His parade and riposte were as quick as lightning. Twice he
touched Duroc upon the shoulder, and then, as the lad slipped on a
lunge, he whirled up his sword to finish him before he could recover his
feet. I was quicker than he, however, and took the cut upon the pommel
of my sabre.

'Excuse me,' said I, 'but you have still to deal with Etienne Gerard.'

He drew back and leaned against the tapestry-covered wall, breathing in
little, hoarse gasps, for his foul living was against him.

'Take your breath,' said I. 'I will await your convenience.'

'You have no cause of quarrel against me,' he panted.

'I owe you some little attention,' said I, 'for having shut me up in
your store-room. Besides, if all other were wanting, I see cause enough
upon that lady's arm.'

'Have your way, then!' he snarled, and leaped at me like a madman. For
a minute I saw only the blazing blue eyes, and the red glazed point
which stabbed and stabbed, rasping off to right or to left, and yet ever
back at my throat and my breast. I had never thought that such good
sword-play was to be found at Paris in the days of the Revolution. I do
not suppose that in all my little affairs I have met six men who had a
better knowledge of their weapon. But he knew that I was his master. He
read death in my eyes, and I could see that he read it. The flush died
from his face. His breath came in shorter and in thicker gasps. Yet he
fought on, even after the final thrust had come, and died still hacking
and cursing, with foul cries upon his lips, and his blood clotting upon
his orange beard. I who speak to you have seen so many battles, that my
old memory can scarce contain their names, and yet of all the terrible
sights which these eyes have rested upon, there is none which I care to
think of less than of that orange beard with the crimson stain in the
centre, from which I had drawn my sword-point.

It was only afterwards that I had time to think of all this. His
monstrous body had hardly crashed down upon the floor before the woman
in the corner sprang to her feet, clapping her hands together and
screaming out in her delight. For my part I was disgusted to see a woman
take such delight in a deed of blood, and I gave no thought as to the
terrible wrongs which must have befallen her before she could so far
forget the gentleness of her sex. It was on my tongue to tell her
sharply to be silent, when a strange, choking smell took the breath from
my nostrils, and a sudden, yellow glare brought out the figures upon the
faded hangings.

'Duroc, Duroc!' I shouted, tugging at his shoulder. 'The Castle is on
fire!'

The boy lay senseless upon the ground, exhausted by his wounds. I rushed
out into the hall to see whence the danger came. It was our explosion
which had set alight to the dry frame-work of the door. Inside the
store-room some of the boxes were already blazing. I glanced in, and as
I did so my blood was turned to water by the sight of the powder barrels
beyond, and of the loose heap upon the floor. It might be seconds, it
could not be more than minutes, before the flames would be at the edge
of it. These eyes will be closed in death, my friends, before they cease
to see those crawling lines of fire and the black heap beyond.

How little I can remember what followed. Vaguely I can recall how I
rushed into the chamber of death, how I seized Duroc by one limp hand
and dragged him down the hall, the woman keeping pace with me and
pulling at the other arm. Out of the gateway we rushed, and on down the
snow-covered path until we were on the fringe of the fir forest. It was
at that moment that I heard a crash behind me, and, glancing round, saw
a great spout of fire shoot up into the wintry sky. An instant later
there seemed to come a second crash, far louder than the first. I saw
the fir trees and the stars whirling round me, and I fell unconscious
across the body of my comrade.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was some weeks before I came to myself in the post-house of
Arensdorf, and longer still before I could be told all that had befallen
me. It was Duroc, already able to go soldiering, who came to my bedside
and gave me an account of it. He it was who told me how a piece of
timber had struck me on the head and laid me almost dead upon the
ground. From him, too, I learned how the Polish girl had run to
Arensdorf, how she had roused our hussars, and how she had only just
brought them back in time to save us from the spears of the Cossacks who
had been summoned from their bivouac by that same black-bearded
secretary whom we had seen galloping so swiftly over the snow. As to the
brave lady who had twice saved our lives, I could not learn very much
about her at that moment from Duroc, but when I chanced to meet him in
Paris two years later, after the campaign of Wagram, I was not very
much surprised to find that I needed no introduction to his bride, and
that by the queer turns of fortune he had himself, had he chosen to use
it, that very name and title of the Baron Straubenthal, which showed him
to be the owner of the blackened ruins of the Castle of Gloom.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote A: The term Brigadier is used throughout in its English and
not in its French sense.]




2. HOW THE BRIGADIER SLEW THE BROTHERS OF AJACCIO


When the Emperor needed an agent he was always very ready to do me the
honour of recalling the name of Etienne Gerard, though it occasionally
escaped him when rewards were to be distributed. Still, I was a colonel
at twenty-eight, and the chief of a brigade at thirty-one, so that I
have no reason to be dissatisfied with my career. Had the wars lasted
another two or three years I might have grasped my bâton, and the man
who had his hand upon that was only one stride from a throne. Murat had
changed his hussar's cap for a crown, and another light cavalry man
might have done as much. However, all those dreams were driven away by
Waterloo, and, although I was not able to write my name upon history, it
is sufficiently well known by all who served with me in the great wars
of the Empire.

What I want to tell you tonight is about the very singular affair which
first started me upon my rapid upward course, and which had the effect
of establishing a secret bond between the Emperor and myself.

There is just one little word of warning which I must give you before I
begin. When you hear me speak, you must always bear in mind that you are
listening to one who has seen history from the inside. I am talking
about what my ears have heard and my eyes have seen, so you must not try
to confute me by quoting the opinions of some student or man of the pen,
who has written a book of history or memoirs. There is much which is
unknown by such people, and much which never will be known by the world.
For my own part, I could tell you some very surprising things were it
discreet to do so. The facts which I am about to relate to you tonight
were kept secret by me during the Emperor's lifetime, because I gave
him my promise that it should be so, but I do not think that there can
be any harm now in my telling the remarkable part which I played.

You must know, then, that at the time of the Treaty of Tilsit I was a
simple lieutenant in the 10th Hussars, without money or interest. It is
true that my appearance and my gallantry were in my favour, and that I
had already won a reputation as being one of the best swordsmen in the
army; but amongst the host of brave men who surrounded the Emperor it
needed more than this to insure a rapid career. I was confident,
however, that my chance would come, though I never dreamed that it would
take so remarkable a form.

When the Emperor returned to Paris, after the declaration of peace in
the year 1807, he spent much of his time with the Empress and the Court
at Fontainebleau. It was the time when he was at the pinnacle of his
career. He had in three successive campaigns humbled Austria, crushed
Prussia, and made the Russians very glad to get upon the right side of
the Niemen. The old Bulldog over the Channel was still growling, but he
could not get very far from his kennel. If we could have made a
perpetual peace at that moment, France would have taken a higher place
than any nation since the days of the Romans. So I have heard the wise
folk say, though for my part I had other things to think of. All the
girls were glad to see the army back after its long absence, and you may
be sure that I had my share of any favours that were going. You may
judge how far I was a favourite in those days when I say that even now,
in my sixtieth year--but why should I dwell upon that which is already
sufficiently well known?

Our regiment of hussars was quartered with the horse chasseurs of the
guard at Fontainebleau. It is, as you know, but a little place, buried
in the heart of the forest, and it was wonderful at this time to see it
crowded with Grand Dukes and Electors and Princes, who thronged round
Napoleon like puppies round their master, each hoping that some bone
might be thrown to him. There was more German than French to be heard in
the street, for those who had helped us in the late war had come to beg
for a reward, and those who had opposed us had come to try and escape
their punishment.

And all the time our little man, with his pale face and his cold, grey
eyes, was riding to the hunt every morning, silent and brooding, all of
them following in his train, in the hope that some word would escape
him. And then, when the humour seized him, he would throw a hundred
square miles to that man, or tear as much off the other, round off one
kingdom by a river, or cut off another by a chain of mountains. That was
how he used to do business, this little artilleryman, whom we had raised
so high with our sabres and our bayonets. He was very civil to us
always, for he knew where his power came from. We knew also, and showed
it by the way in which we carried ourselves. We were agreed, you
understand, that he was the finest leader in the world, but we did not
forget that he had the finest men to lead.

Well, one day I was seated in my quarters playing cards with young
Morat, of the horse chasseurs, when the door opened and in walked
Lasalle, who was our Colonel. You know what a fine, swaggering fellow he
was, and the sky-blue uniform of the Tenth suited him to a marvel. My
faith, we youngsters were so taken by him that we all swore and diced
and drank and played the deuce whether we liked it or no, just that we
might resemble our Colonel! We forgot that it was not because he drank
or gambled that the Emperor was going to make him the head of the light
cavalry, but because he had the surest eye for the nature of a position
or for the strength of a column, and the best judgment as to when
infantry could be broken, or whether guns were exposed, of any man in
the army. We were too young to understand all that, however, so we
waxed our moustaches and clicked our spurs and let the ferrules of our
scabbards wear out by trailing them along the pavement in the hope that
we should all become Lasalles. When he came clanking into my quarters,
both Morat and I sprang to our feet.

'My boy,' said he, clapping me on the shoulder, 'the Emperor wants to
see you at four o'clock.'

The room whirled round me at the words, and I had to lean my hands upon
the edge of the card-table.

'What?' I cried. 'The Emperor!'

'Precisely,' said he, smiling at my astonishment.

'But the Emperor does not know of my existence, Colonel,' I protested.
'Why should he send for me?'

'Well, that's just what puzzles me,' cried Lasalle, twirling his
moustache. 'If he wanted the help of a good sabre, why should he descend
to one of my lieutenants when he might have found all that he needed at
the head of the regiment? However,' he added, clapping me on the
shoulder again in his hearty fashion, 'every man has his chance. I have
had mine, otherwise I should not be Colonel of the Tenth. I must not
grudge you yours. Forwards, my boy, and may it be the first step towards
changing your busby for a cocked hat.'

It was but two o'clock, so he left me, promising to come back and to
accompany me to the palace. My faith, what a time I passed, and how many
conjectures did I make as to what it was that the Emperor could want of
me! I paced up and down my little room in a fever of anticipation.
Sometimes I thought that perhaps he had heard of the guns which we had
taken at Austerlitz; but, then, there were so many who had taken guns at
Austerlitz, and two years had passed since the battle. Or it might be
that he wished to reward me for my affair with the _aide-de-camp_ of the
Russian Emperor. But then again a cold fit would seize me, and I would
fancy that he had sent for me to reprimand me. There were a few duels
which he might have taken in ill part, and there were one or two little
jokes in Paris since the peace.

But, no! I considered the words of Lasalle. 'If he had need of a brave
man,' said Lasalle.

It was obvious that my Colonel had some idea of what was in the wind. If
he had not known that it was to my advantage, he would not have been so
cruel as to congratulate me. My heart glowed with joy as this conviction
grew upon me, and I sat down to write to my mother and to tell her that
the Emperor was waiting, at that very moment, to have my opinion upon a
matter of importance. It made me smile as I wrote it to think that,
wonderful as it appeared to me, it would probably only confirm my mother
in her opinion of the Emperor's good sense.

At half-past three I heard a sabre come clanking against every step of
my wooden stair. It was Lasalle, and with him was a lame gentleman, very
neatly dressed in black with dapper ruffles and cuffs. We did not know
many civilians, we of the army, but, my word, this was one whom we could
not afford to ignore! I had only to glance at those twinkling eyes, the
comical, upturned nose, and the straight, precise mouth, to know that I
was in the presence of the one man in France whom even the Emperor had
to consider.

'This is Monsieur Etienne Gerard, Monsieur de Talleyrand,' said Lasalle.

I saluted, and the statesman took me in from the top of my panache to
the rowel of my spur, with a glance that played over me like a rapier
point.

'Have you explained to the lieutenant the circumstances under which he
is summoned to the Emperor's presence?' he asked, in his dry, creaking
voice.

They were such a contrast, these two men, that I could not help glancing
from one to the other of them: the black, sly politician, and the big,
sky-blue hussar with one fist on his hip and the other on the hilt of
his sabre. They both took their seats as I looked, Talleyrand without a
sound, and Lasalle with a clash and a jingle like a prancing charger.

'It's this way, youngster,' said he, in his brusque fashion; 'I was with
the Emperor in his private cabinet this morning when a note was brought
in to him. He opened it, and as he did so he gave such a start that it
fluttered down on to the floor. I handed it up to him again, but he was
staring at the wall in front of him as if he had seen a ghost. "Fratelli
dell' Ajaccio," he muttered; and then again, "Fratelli dell' Ajaccio." I
don't pretend to know more Italian than a man can pick up in two
campaigns, and I could make nothing of this. It seemed to me that he had
gone out of his mind; and you would have said so also, Monsieur de
Talleyrand, if you had seen the look in his eyes. He read the note, and
then he sat for half an hour or more without moving.'

'And you?' asked Talleyrand.

'Why, I stood there not knowing what I ought to do. Presently he seemed
to come back to his senses.

'"I suppose, Lasalle," said he, "that you have some gallant young
officers in the Tenth?"

'"They are all that, sire," I answered.

'"If you had to pick one who was to be depended upon for action, but who
would not think too much--you understand me, Lasalle--which would you
select?" he asked.

'I saw that he needed an agent who would not penetrate too deeply into
his plans.

'"I have one," said I, "who is all spurs and moustaches, with never a
thought beyond women and horses."

'"That is the man I want," said Napoleon. "Bring him to my private
cabinet at four o'clock."

'So, youngster, I came straight away to you at once, and mind that you
do credit to the 10th Hussars.'

I was by no means flattered by the reasons which had led to my Colonel's
choice, and I must have shown as much in my face, for he roared with
laughter and Talleyrand gave a dry chuckle also.

'Just one word of advice before you go, Monsieur Gerard,' said he: 'you
are now coming into troubled waters, and you might find a worse pilot
than myself. We have none of us any idea as to what this little affair
means, and, between ourselves, it is very important for us, who have the
destinies of France upon our shoulders, to keep ourselves in touch with
all that goes on. You understand me, Monsieur Gerard?'

I had not the least idea what he was driving at, but I bowed and tried
to look as if it was clear to me.

'Act very guardedly, then, and say nothing to anybody,' said Talleyrand.
'Colonel de Lasalle and I will not show ourselves in public with you,
but we will await you here, and we will give you our advice when you
have told us what has passed between the Emperor and yourself. It is
time that you started now, for the Emperor never forgives
unpunctuality.'

Off I went on foot to the palace, which was only a hundred paces off. I
made my way to the ante-chamber, where Duroc, with his grand new scarlet
and gold coat, was fussing about among the crowd of people who were
waiting. I heard him whisper to Monsieur de Caulaincourt that half of
them were German Dukes who expected to be made Kings, and the other half
German Dukes who expected to be made paupers. Duroc, when he heard my
name, showed me straight in, and I found myself in the Emperor's
presence.

I had, of course, seen him in camp a hundred times, but I had never been
face to face with him before. I have no doubt that if you had met him
without knowing in the least who he was, you would simply have said that
he was a sallow little fellow with a good forehead and fairly
well-turned calves. His tight white cashmere breeches and white
stockings showed off his legs to advantage. But even a stranger must
have been struck by the singular look of his eyes, which could harden
into an expression which would frighten a grenadier. It is said that
even Auguereau, who was a man who had never known what fear was, quailed
before Napoleon's gaze, at a time, too, when the Emperor was but an
unknown soldier. He looked mildly enough at me, however, and motioned me
to remain by the door. De Meneval was writing to his dictation, looking
up at him between each sentence with his spaniel eyes.

'That will do. You can go,' said the Emperor, abruptly. Then, when the
secretary had left the room, he strode across with his hands behind his
back, and he looked me up and down without a word. Though he was a small
man himself, he was very fond of having fine-looking fellows about him,
and so I think that my appearance gave him pleasure. For my own part, I
raised one hand to the salute and held the other upon the hilt of my
sabre, looking straight ahead of me, as a soldier should.

'Well, Monsieur Gerard,' said he, at last, tapping his forefinger upon
one of the brandebourgs of gold braid upon the front of my pelisse, 'I
am informed that you are a very deserving young officer. Your Colonel
gives me an excellent account of you.'

I wished to make a brilliant reply, but I could think of nothing save
Lasalle's phrase that I was all spurs and moustaches, so it ended in my
saying nothing at all. The Emperor watched the struggle which must have
shown itself upon my features, and when, finally, no answer came he did
not appear to be displeased.

'I believe that you are the very man that I want,' said he. 'Brave and
clever men surround me upon every side. But a brave man who----' He did
not finish his sentence, and for my own part I could not understand what
he was driving at. I contented myself with assuring him that he could
count upon me to the death.

'You are, as I understand, a good swordsman?' said he.

'Tolerable, sire,' I answered.

'You were chosen by your regiment to fight the champion of the Hussars
of Chambarant?' said he.

I was not sorry to find that he knew so much of my exploits.

'My comrades, sire, did me that honour,' said I.

'And for the sake of practice you insulted six fencing masters in the
week before your duel?'

'I had the privilege of being out seven times in as many days, sire,'
said I.

'And escaped without a scratch?'

'The fencing master of the 23rd Light Infantry touched me on the left
elbow, sire.'

'Let us have no more child's play of the sort, monsieur,' he cried,
turning suddenly to that cold rage of his which was so appalling. 'Do
you imagine that I place veteran soldiers in these positions that you
may practise quarte and tierce upon them? How am I to face Europe if my
soldiers turn their points upon each other? Another word of your
duelling, and I break you between these fingers.'

I saw his plump white hands flash before my eyes as he spoke, and his
voice had turned to the most discordant hissing and growling. My word,
my skin pringled all over as I listened to him, and I would gladly have
changed my position for that of the first man in the steepest and
narrowest breach that ever swallowed up a storming party. He turned to
the table, drank off a cup of coffee, and then when he faced me again
every trace of this storm had vanished, and he wore that singular smile
which came from his lips but never from his eyes.

'I have need of your services, Monsieur Gerard,' said he. 'I may be
safer with a good sword at my side, and there are reasons why yours
should be the one which I select. But first of all I must bind you to
secrecy. Whilst I live what passes between us today must be known to
none but ourselves.'

I thought of Talleyrand and of Lasalle, but I promised.

'In the next place, I do not want your opinions or conjectures, and I
wish you to do exactly what you are told.'

I bowed.

'It is your sword that I need, and not your brains. I will do the
thinking. Is that clear to you?'

'Yes, sire.'

'You know the Chancellor's Grove, in the forest?'

I bowed.

'You know also the large double fir-tree where the hounds assembled on
Tuesday?'

Had he known that I met a girl under it three times a week, he would not
have asked me. I bowed once more without remark.

'Very good. You will meet me there at ten o'clock tonight.'

I had got past being surprised at anything which might happen. If he had
asked me to take his place upon the imperial throne I could only have
nodded my busby.

'We shall then proceed into the wood together,' said the Emperor. 'You
will be armed with a sword, but not with pistols. You must address no
remark to me, and I shall say nothing to you. We will advance in
silence. You understand?'

'I understand, sire.'

'After a time we shall see a man, or more probably two men, under a
certain tree. We shall approach them together. If I signal to you to
defend me, you will have your sword ready. If, on the other hand, I
speak to these men, you will wait and see what happens. If you are
called upon to draw, you must see that neither of them, in the event of
there being two, escapes from us. I shall myself assist you.'

'Sire,' I cried, 'I have no doubt that two would not be too many for my
sword; but would it not be better that I should bring a comrade than
that you should be forced to join in such a struggle?'

'Ta, ta, ta,' said he. 'I was a soldier before I was an Emperor. Do you
think, then, that artillerymen have not swords as well as the hussars?
But I ordered you not to argue with me. You will do exactly what I tell
you. If swords are once out, neither of these men is to get away alive.'

'They shall not, sire,' said I.

'Very good. I have no more instructions for you. You can go.'

I turned to the door, and then an idea occurring to me I turned.

'I have been thinking, sire--' said I.

He sprang at me with the ferocity of a wild beast. I really thought he
would have struck me.

'Thinking!' he cried. 'You, _you_! Do you imagine I chose you out
because you could think? Let me hear of your doing such a thing again!
You, the one man--but, there! You meet me at the fir-tree at ten
o'clock.'

My faith, I was right glad to get out of the room. If I have a good
horse under me, and a sword clanking against my stirrup-iron, I know
where I am. And in all that relates to green fodder or dry, barley and
oats and rye, and the handling of squadrons upon the march, there is no
one who can teach me very much. But when I meet a Chamberlain and a
Marshal of the Palace, and have to pick my words with an Emperor, and
find that everybody hints instead of talking straight out, I feel like a
troop-horse who has been put in a lady's calèche. It is not my trade,
all this mincing and pretending. I have learned the manners of a
gentleman, but never those of a courtier. I was right glad then to get
into the fresh air again, and I ran away up to my quarters like a
schoolboy who has just escaped from the seminary master.

But as I opened the door, the very first thing that my eye rested upon
was a long pair of sky-blue legs with hussar boots, and a short pair of
black ones with knee breeches and buckles. They both sprang up together
to greet me.

'Well, what news?' they cried, the two of them.

'None,' I answered.

'The Emperor refused to see you?'

'No, I have seen him.'

'And what did he say?'

'Monsieur de Talleyrand,' I answered, 'I regret to say that it is quite
impossible for me to tell you anything about it. I have promised the
Emperor.'

'Pooh, pooh, my dear young man,' said he, sidling up to me, as a cat
does when it is about to rub itself against you. 'This is all among
friends, you understand, and goes no farther than these four walls.
Besides, the Emperor never meant to include me in this promise.'

'It is but a minute's walk to the palace, Monsieur de Talleyrand,' I
answered; 'if it would not be troubling you too much to ask you to step
up to it and bring back the Emperor's written statement that he did not
mean to include you in this promise, I shall be happy to tell you every
word that passed.'

He showed his teeth at me then like the old fox that he was.

'Monsieur Gerard appears to be a little puffed up,' said he. 'He is too
young to see things in their just proportion. As he grows older he may
understand that it is not always very discreet for a subaltern of
cavalry to give such very abrupt refusals.'

I did not know what to say to this, but Lasalle came to my aid in his
downright fashion.

'The lad is quite right,' said he. 'If I had known that there was a
promise I should not have questioned him. You know very well, Monsieur
de Talleyrand, that if he had answered you, you would have laughed in
your sleeve and thought as much about him as I think of the bottle when
the burgundy is gone. As for me, I promise you that the Tenth would have
had no room for him, and that we should have lost our best swordsman if
I had heard him give up the Emperor's secret.'

But the statesman became only the more bitter when he saw that I had
the support of my Colonel.

'I have heard, Colonel de Lasalle,' said he, with an icy dignity, 'that
your opinion is of great weight upon the subject of light cavalry.
Should I have occasion to seek information about that branch of the
army, I shall be very happy to apply to you. At present, however, the
matter concerns diplomacy, and you will permit me to form my own views
upon that question. As long as the welfare of France and the safety of
the Emperor's person are largely committed to my care, I will use every
means in my power to secure them, even if it should be against the
Emperor's own temporary wishes. I have the honour, Colonel de Lasalle,
to wish you a very good-day!'

He shot a most unamiable glance in my direction, and, turning upon his
heel, he walked with little, quick, noiseless steps out of the room.

I could see from Lasalle's face that he did not at all relish finding
himself at enmity with the powerful Minister. He rapped out an oath or
two, and then, catching up his sabre and his cap, he clattered away down
the stairs. As I looked out of the window I saw the two of them, the big
blue man and the limping black one, going up the street together.
Talleyrand was walking very rigidly, and Lasalle was waving his hands
and talking, so I suppose he was trying to make his peace.

The Emperor had told me not to think, and I endeavoured to obey him. I
took up the cards from the table where Morat had left them, and I tried
to work out a few combinations at écarté. But I could not remember which
were trumps, and I threw them under the table in despair. Then I drew my
sabre and practised giving point until I was weary, but it was all of no
use at all. My mind _would_ work, in spite of myself. At ten o'clock I
was to meet the Emperor in the forest. Of all extraordinary combinations
of events in the whole world, surely this was the last which would have
occurred to me when I rose from my couch that morning. But the
responsibility--- the dreadful responsibility! It was all upon my
shoulders. There was no one to halve it with me. It made me cold all
over. Often as I have faced death upon the battle-field, I have never
known what real fear was until that moment. But then I considered that
after all I could but do my best like a brave and honourable gentleman,
and above all obey the orders which I had received, to the very letter.
And, if all went well, this would surely be the foundation of my
fortunes. Thus, swaying between my fears and my hopes, I spent the long,
long evening until it was time to keep my appointment.

I put on my military overcoat, as I did not know how much of the night I
might have to spend in the woods, and I fastened my sword outside it. I
pulled off my hussar boots also, and wore a pair of shoes and gaiters,
that I might be lighter upon my feet. Then I stole out of my quarters
and made for the forest, feeling very much easier in my mind, for I am
always at my best when the time of thought has passed and the moment for
action arrived.

I passed the barracks of the Chasseurs of the Guards, and the line of
cafes all filled with uniforms. I caught a glimpse as I went by of the
blue and gold of some of my comrades, amid the swarm of dark infantry
coats and the light green of the Guides. There they sat, sipping their
wine and smoking their cigars, little dreaming what their comrade had on
hand. One of them, the chief of my squadron, caught sight of me in the
lamplight, and came shouting after me into the street. I hurried on,
however, pretending not to hear him, so he, with a curse at my deafness,
went back at last to his wine bottle.

It is not very hard to get into the forest at Fontainebleau. The
scattered trees steal their way into the very streets, like the
tirailleurs in front of a column. I turned into a path, which led to the
edge of the woods, and then I pushed rapidly forward towards the old
fir-tree. It was a place which, as I have hinted, I had my own reasons
for knowing well, and I could only thank the Fates that it was not one
of the nights upon which Léonie would be waiting for me. The poor child
would have died of terror at sight of the Emperor. He might have been
too harsh with her--and worse still, he might have been too kind.

There was a half moon shining, and, as I came up to our trysting-place,
I saw that I was not the first to arrive. The Emperor was pacing up and
down, his hands behind him and his face sunk somewhat forward upon his
breast. He wore a grey great-coat with a capote over his head. I had
seen him in such a dress in our winter campaign in Poland, and it was
said that he used it because the hood was such an excellent disguise. He
was always fond, whether in the camp or in Paris, of walking round at
night, and overhearing the talk in the cabarets or round the fires. His
figure, however, and his way of carrying his head and his hands were so
well known that he was always recognized, and then the talkers would say
whatever they thought would please him best.

My first thought was that he would be angry with me for having kept him
waiting, but as I approached him, we heard the big church clock of
Fontainebleau clang out the hour of ten. It was evident, therefore, that
it was he who was too soon, and not I too late. I remembered his order
that I should make no remark, so contented myself with halting within
four paces of him, clicking my spurs together, grounding my sabre, and
saluting. He glanced at me, and then without a word he turned and walked
slowly through the forest, I keeping always about the same distance
behind him. Once or twice he seemed to me to look apprehensively to
right and to left, as if he feared that someone was observing us. I
looked also, but although I have the keenest sight, it was quite
impossible to see anything except the ragged patches of moonshine
between the great black shadows of the trees. My ears are as quick as
my eyes, and once or twice I thought that I heard a twig crack; but you
know how many sounds there are in a forest at night, and how difficult
it is even to say what direction they come from.

We walked for rather more than a mile, and I knew exactly what our
destination was, long before we got there. In the centre of one of the
glades, there is the shattered stump of what must at some time have been
a most gigantic tree. It is called the Abbot's Beech, and there are so
many ghostly stories about it, that I know many a brave soldier who
would not care about mounting sentinel over it. However, I cared as
little for such folly as the Emperor did, so we crossed the glade and
made straight for the old broken trunk. As we approached, I saw that two
men were waiting for us beneath it.

When I first caught sight of them they were standing rather behind it,
as if they were not anxious to be seen, but as we came nearer they
emerged from its shadow and walked forward to meet us. The Emperor
glanced back at me, and slackened his pace a little so that I came
within arm's length of him. You may think that I had my hilt well to the
front, and that I had a very good look at these two people who were
approaching us.

The one was tall, remarkably so, and of very spare frame, while the
other was rather below the usual height, and had a brisk, determined way
of walking. They each wore black cloaks, which were slung right across
their figures, and hung down upon one side, like the mantles of Murat's
dragoons. They had flat black caps, like those I have since seen in
Spain, which threw their faces into darkness, though I could see the
gleam of their eyes from beneath them. With the moon behind them and
their long black shadows walking in front, they were such figures as one
might expect to meet at night near the Abbot's Beech. I can remember
that they had a stealthy way of moving, and that as they approached, the
moonshine formed two white diamonds between their legs and the legs of
their shadows.

The Emperor had paused, and these two strangers came to a stand also
within a few paces of us. I had drawn up close to my companion's elbow,
so that the four of us were facing each other without a word spoken. My
eyes were particularly fixed upon the taller one, because he was
slightly the nearer to me, and I became certain as I watched him that he
was in the last state of nervousness. His lean figure was quivering all
over, and I heard a quick, thin panting like that of a tired dog.
Suddenly one of them gave a short, hissing signal. The tall man bent his
back and his knees like a diver about to spring, but before he could
move, I had jumped with drawn sabre in front of him. At the same instant
the smaller man bounded past me, and buried a long poniard in the
Emperor's heart.

My God! the horror of that moment! It is a marvel that I did not drop
dead myself. As in a dream, I saw the grey coat whirl convulsively
round, and caught a glimpse in the moonlight of three inches of red
point which jutted out from between the shoulders. Then down he fell
with a dead man's gasp upon the grass, and the assassin, leaving his
weapon buried in his victim, threw up both his hands and shrieked with
joy. But I--I drove my sword through his midriff with such frantic
force, that the mere blow of the hilt against the end of his breast-bone
sent him six paces before he fell, and left my reeking blade ready for
the other. I sprang round upon him with such a lust for blood upon me as
I had never felt, and never have felt, in all my days. As I turned, a
dagger flashed before my eyes, and I felt the cold wind of it pass my
neck and the villain's wrist jar upon my shoulder. I shortened my sword,
but he winced away from me, and an instant afterwards was in full
flight, bounding like a deer across the glade in the moonlight.

But he was not to escape me thus. I knew that the murderer's poniard
had done its work. Young as I was, I had seen enough of war to know a
mortal blow. I paused but for an instant to touch the cold hand.

'Sire! Sire!' I cried, in an agony; and then as no sound came back and
nothing moved, save an ever-widening dark circle in the moonlight, I
knew that all was indeed over. I sprang madly to my feet, threw off my
great-coat, and ran at the top of my speed after the remaining assassin.

Ah, how I blessed the wisdom which had caused me to come in shoes and
gaiters! And the happy thought which had thrown off my coat. He could
not get rid of his mantle, this wretch, or else he was too frightened to
think of it. So it was that I gained upon him from the beginning. He
must have been out of his wits, for he never tried to bury himself in
the darker parts of the woods, but he flew on from glade to glade, until
he came to the heath-land which leads up to the great Fontainebleau
quarry. There I had him in full sight, and knew that he could not escape
me. He ran well, it is true--ran as a coward runs when his life is the
stake. But I ran as Destiny runs when it gets behind a man's heels. Yard
by yard I drew in upon him. He was rolling and staggering. I could hear
the rasping and crackling of his breath. The great gulf of the quarry
suddenly yawned in front of his path, and glancing at me over his
shoulder, he gave a shriek of despair. The next instant he had vanished
from my sight.

Vanished utterly, you understand. I rushed to the spot, and gazed down
into the black abyss. Had he hurled himself over? I had almost made up
my mind that he had done so, when a gentle sound rising and falling came
out of the darkness beneath me. It was his breathing once more, and it
showed me where he must be. He was hiding in the tool-house.

At the edge of the quarry and beneath the summit there is a small
platform upon which stands a wooden hut for the use of the labourers.
It was into this, then, that he had darted. Perhaps he had thought, the
fool, that, in the darkness, I would not venture to follow him. He
little knew Etienne Gerard. With a spring I was on the platform, with
another I was through the doorway, and then, hearing him in the corner,
I hurled myself down upon the top of him.

He fought like a wild cat, but he never had a chance with his shorter
weapon. I think that I must have transfixed him with that first mad
lunge, for, though he struck and struck, his blows had no power in them,
and presently his dagger tinkled down upon the floor. When I was sure
that he was dead, I rose up and passed out into the moonlight. I climbed
on to the heath again, and wandered across it as nearly out of my mind
as a man could be.

With the blood singing in my ears, and my naked sword still clutched in
my hand, I walked aimlessly on until, looking round me, I found that I
had come as far as the glade of the Abbot's Beech, and saw in the
distance that gnarled stump which must ever be associated with the most
terrible moment of my life. I sat down upon a fallen trunk with my sword
across my knees and my head between my hands, and I tried to think about
what had happened and what would happen in the future.

The Emperor had committed himself to my care. The Emperor was dead.
Those were the two thoughts which clanged in my head, until I had no
room for any other ones. He had come with me and he was dead. I had done
what he had ordered when living. I had revenged him when dead. But what
of all that? The world would look upon me as responsible. They might
even look upon me as the assassin. What could I prove? What witnesses
had I? Might I not have been the accomplice of these wretches? Yes, yes,
I was eternally dishonoured--the lowest, most despicable creature in all
France. This, then, was the end of my fine military ambitions--of the
hopes of my mother. I laughed bitterly at the thought. And what was I
to do now? Was I to go into Fontainebleau, to wake up the palace, and to
inform them that the great Emperor had been murdered within a pace of
me? I could not do it--no, I could not do it! There was but one course
for an honourable gentleman whom Fate had placed in so cruel a position.
I would fall upon my dishonoured sword, and so share, since I could not
avert, the Emperor's fate. I rose with my nerves strung to this last
piteous deed, and as I did so, my eyes fell upon something which struck
the breath from my lips. The Emperor was standing before me!

He was not more than ten yards off, with the moon shining straight upon
his cold, pale face. He wore his grey overcoat, but the hood was turned
back, and the front open, so that I could see the green coat of the
Guides, and the white breeches. His hands were clasped behind his back,
and his chin sunk forward upon his breast, in the way that was usual
with him.

'Well,' said he, in his hardest and most abrupt voice, 'what account do
you give of yourself?'

I believe that, if he had stood in silence for another minute, my brain
would have given way. But those sharp military accents were exactly what
I needed to bring me to myself. Living or dead, here was the Emperor
standing before me and asking me questions. I sprang to the salute.

'You have killed one, I see,' said he, jerking his head towards the
beech.

'Yes, sire.'

'And the other escaped?'

'No, sire, I killed him also.'

'What!' he cried. 'Do I understand that you have killed them both?' He
approached me as he spoke with a smile which set his teeth gleaming in
the moonlight.

'One body lies there, sire,' I answered. 'The other is in the tool-house
at the quarry.'

'Then the Brothers of Ajaccio are no more,' he cried, and after a
pause, as if speaking to himself: 'The shadow has passed me for ever.'
Then he bent forward and laid his hand upon my shoulder.

'You have done very well, my young friend,' said he. 'You have lived up
to your reputation.'

He was flesh and blood, then, this Emperor. I could feel the little,
plump palm that rested upon me. And yet I could not get over what I had
seen with my own eyes, and so I stared at him in such bewilderment that
he broke once more into one of his smiles.

'No, no, Monsieur Gerard,' said he, 'I am not a ghost, and you have not
seen me killed. You will come here, and all will be clear to you.'

He turned as he spoke, and led the way towards the great beech stump.

The bodies were still lying upon the ground, and two men were standing
beside them. As we approached I saw from the turbans that they were
Roustem and Mustafa, the two Mameluke servants. The Emperor paused when
he came to the grey figure upon the ground, and turning back the hood
which shrouded the features, he showed a face which was very different
from his own.

'Here lies a faithful servant who has given up his life for his master,'
said he. 'Monsieur de Goudin resembles me in figure and in manner, as
you must admit.'

What a delirium of joy came upon me when these few words made everything
clear to me. He smiled again as he saw the delight which urged me to
throw my arms round him and to embrace him, but he moved a step away, as
if he had divined my impulse.

'You are unhurt?' he asked.

'I am unhurt, sire. But in another minute I should in my despair----'

'Tut, tut!' he interrupted. 'You did very well. He should himself have
been more on his guard. I saw everything which passed.'

'You saw it, sire!'

'You did not hear me follow you through the wood, then? I hardly lost
sight of you from the moment that you left your quarters until poor De
Goudin fell. The counterfeit Emperor was in front of you and the real
one behind. You will now escort me back to the palace.'

He whispered an order to his Mamelukes, who saluted in silence and
remained where they were standing. For my part, I followed the Emperor
with my pelisse bursting with pride. My word, I have always carried
myself as a hussar should, but Lasalle himself never strutted and swung
his dolman as I did that night. Who should clink his spurs and clatter
his sabre if it were not I--I, Etienne Gerard--the confidant of the
Emperor, the chosen swordsman of the light cavalry, the man who slew the
would-be assassins of Napoleon? But he noticed my bearing and turned
upon me like a blight.

'Is that the way you carry yourself on a secret mission?' he hissed,
with that cold glare in his eyes. 'Is it thus that you will make your
comrades believe that nothing remarkable has occurred? Have done with
this nonsense, monsieur, or you will find yourself transferred to the
sappers, where you would have harder work and duller plumage.'

That was the way with the Emperor. If ever he thought that anyone might
have a claim upon him, he took the first opportunity to show him the
gulf that lay between. I saluted and was silent, but I must confess to
you that it hurt me after all that had passed between us. He led on to
the palace, where we passed through the side door and up into his own
cabinet. There were a couple of grenadiers at the staircase, and their
eyes started out from under their fur caps, I promise you, when they saw
a young lieutenant of hussars going up to the Emperor's room at
midnight. I stood by the door, as I had done in the afternoon, while he
flung himself down in an arm-chair, and remained silent so long that it
seemed to me that he had forgotten all about me. I ventured at last upon
a slight cough to remind him.

'Ah, Monsieur Gerard,' said he, 'you are very curious, no doubt, as to
the meaning of all this?'

'I am quite content, sire, if it is your pleasure not to tell me,' I
answered.

'Ta, ta, ta,' said he impatiently. 'These are only words. The moment
that you were outside that door you would begin making inquiries about
what it means. In two days your brother officers would know about it, in
three days it would be all over Fontainebleau, and it would be in Paris
on the fourth. Now, if I tell you enough to appease your curiosity,
there is some reasonable hope that you may be able to keep the matter to
yourself.'

He did not understand me, this Emperor, and yet I could only bow and be
silent.

'A few words will make it clear to you,' said he, speaking very swiftly
and pacing up and down the room. 'They were Corsicans, these two men. I
had known them in my youth. We had belonged to the same
society--Brothers of Ajaccio, as we called ourselves. It was founded in
the old Paoli days, you understand, and we had some strict rules of our
own which were not infringed with impunity.'

A very grim look came over his face as he spoke, and it seemed to me
that all that was French had gone out of him, and that it was the pure
Corsican, the man of strong passions and of strange revenges, who stood
before me. His memory had gone back to those early days of his, and for
five minutes, wrapped in thought, he paced up and down the room with his
quick little tiger steps. Then with an impatient wave of his hands he
came back to his palace and to me.

'The rules of such a society,' he continued, 'are all very well for a
private citizen. In the old days there was no more loyal brother than I.
But circumstances change, and it would be neither for my welfare nor
for that of France that I should now submit myself to them. They wanted
to hold me to it, and so brought their fate upon their own heads. These
were the two chiefs of the order, and they had come from Corsica to
summon me to meet them at the spot which they named. I knew what such a
summons meant. No man had ever returned from obeying one. On the other
hand, if I did not go, I was sure that disaster would follow. I am a
brother myself, you remember, and I know their ways.'

Again there came that hardening of his mouth and cold glitter of his
eyes.

'You perceive my dilemma, Monsieur Gerard,' said he. 'How would you have
acted yourself, under such circumstances?'

'Given the word to the l0th Hussars, sire,' I cried. 'Patrols could have
swept the woods from end to end, and brought these two rascals to your
feet.'

He smiled, but he shook his head.

'I had very excellent reasons why I did not wish them taken alive,' said
he. 'You can understand that an assassin's tongue might be as dangerous
a weapon as an assassin's dagger. I will not disguise from you that I
wished to avoid scandal at all cost. That was why I ordered you to take
no pistols with you. That also is why my Mamelukes will remove all
traces of the affair, and nothing more will be heard about it. I thought
of all possible plans, and I am convinced that I selected the best one.
Had I sent more than one guard with De Goudin into the woods, then the
brothers would not have appeared. They would not change their plans nor
miss their chance for the sake of a single man. It was Colonel Lasalle's
accidental presence at the moment when I received the summons which led
to my choosing one of his hussars for the mission. I selected you,
Monsieur Gerard, because I wanted a man who could handle a sword, and
who would not pry more deeply into the affair than I desired. I trust
that, in this respect, you will justify my choice as well as you have
done in your bravery and skill.'

'Sire,' I answered, 'you may rely upon it.'

'As long as I live,' said he, 'you never open your lips upon this
subject.'

'I dismiss it entirely from my mind, sire. I will efface it from my
recollection as if it had never been. I will promise you to go out of
your cabinet at this moment exactly as I was when I entered it at four
o'clock.'

'You cannot do that,' said the Emperor, smiling. 'You were a lieutenant
at that time. You will permit me, Captain, to wish you a very
good-night.'




3. HOW THE BRIGADIER HELD THE KING


Here, upon the lapel of my coat, you may see the ribbon of my
decoration, but the medal itself I keep in a leathern pouch at home, and
I never venture to take it out unless one of the modern peace generals,
or some foreigner of distinction who finds himself in our little town,
takes advantage of the opportunity to pay his respects to the well-known
Brigadier Gerard. Then I place it upon my breast, and I give my
moustache the old Marengo twist which brings a grey point into either
eye. Yet with it all I fear that neither they, nor you either, my
friends, will ever realize the man that I was. You know me only as a
civilian--with an air and a manner, it is true--but still merely as a
civilian. Had you seen me as I stood in the doorway of the inn at Alamo,
on the 1st of July, in the year 1810, you would then have known what the
hussar may attain to.

For a month I had lingered in that accursed village, and all on account
of a lance-thrust in my ankle, which made it impossible for me to put my
foot to the ground. There were three besides myself at first: old
Bouvet, of the Hussars of Bercheny, Jacques Regnier, of the Cuirassiers,
and a funny little voltigeur captain whose name I forget; but they all
got well and hurried on to the front, while I sat gnawing my fingers and
tearing my hair, and even, I must confess, weeping from time to time as
I thought of my Hussars of Conflans, and the deplorable condition in
which they must find themselves when deprived of their colonel. I was
not a chief of brigade yet, you understand, although I already carried
myself like one, but I was the youngest colonel in the whole service,
and my regiment was wife and children to me. It went to my heart that
they should be so bereaved. It is true that Villaret, the senior major,
was an excellent soldier; but still, even among the best there are
degrees of merit.

Ah, that happy July day of which I speak, when first I limped to the
door and stood in the golden Spanish sunshine! It was but the evening
before that I had heard from the regiment. They were at Pastores, on the
other side of the mountains, face to face with the English--not forty
miles from me by road. But how was I to get to them? The same thrust
which had pierced my ankle had slain my charger. I took advice both from
Gomez, the landlord, and from an old priest who had slept that night in
the inn, but neither of them could do more than assure me that there was
not so much as a colt left upon the whole countryside.

The landlord would not hear of my crossing the mountains without an
escort, for he assured me that El Cuchillo, the Spanish guerilla chief,
was out that way with his band, and that it meant a death by torture to
fall into his hands. The old priest observed, however, that he did not
think a French hussar would be deterred by that, and if I had had any
doubts, they would of course have been decided by his remark.

But a horse! How was I to get one? I was standing in the doorway,
plotting and planning, when I heard the clink of shoes, and, looking up,
I saw a great bearded man, with a blue cloak frogged across in military
fashion, coming towards me. He was riding a big black horse with one
white stocking on his near fore-leg.

'Halloa, comrade!' said I, as he came up to me.

'Halloa!' said he.

'I am Colonel Gerard, of the Hussars,' said I. 'I have lain here wounded
for a month, and I am now ready to rejoin my regiment at Pastores.'

'I am Monsieur Vidal, of the commissariat,' he answered, 'and I am
myself upon my way to Pastores. I should be glad to have your company,
Colonel, for I hear that the mountains are far from safe.'

'Alas,' said I, 'I have no horse. But if you will sell me yours, I will
promise that an escort of hussars shall be sent back for you.'

He would not hear of it, and it was in vain that the landlord told him
dreadful stories of the doings of El Cuchillo, and that I pointed out
the duty which he owed to the army and to the country. He would not even
argue, but called loudly for a cup of wine. I craftily asked him to
dismount and to drink with me, but he must have seen something in my
face, for he shook his head; and then, as I approached him with some
thought of seizing him by the leg, he jerked his heels into his horse's
flanks, and was off in a cloud of dust.

My faith! it was enough to make a man mad to see this fellow riding away
so gaily to join his beef-barrels, and his brandy-casks, and then to
think of my five hundred beautiful hussars without their leader. I was
gazing after him with bitter thoughts in my mind, when who should touch
me on the elbow but the little priest whom I have mentioned.

'It is I who can help you,' he said. 'I am myself travelling south.'

I put my arms about him and, as my ankle gave way at the same moment, we
nearly rolled upon the ground together.

'Get me to Pastores,' I cried, 'and you shall have a rosary of golden
beads.' I had taken one from the Convent of Spiritu Santo. It shows how
necessary it is to take what you can when you are upon a campaign, and
how the most unlikely things may become useful.

'I will take you,' he said, in very excellent French, 'not because I
hope for any reward, but because it is my way always to do what I can to
serve my fellow-man, and that is why I am so beloved wherever I go.'

With that he led me down the village to an old cow-house, in which we
found a tumble-down sort of diligence, such as they used to run early
in this century, between some of our remote villages. There were three
old mules, too, none of which were strong enough to carry a man, but
together they might draw the coach. The sight of their gaunt ribs and
spavined legs gave me more delight than the whole two hundred and twenty
hunters of the Emperor which I have seen in their stalls at
Fontainebleau. In ten minutes the owner was harnessing them into the
coach, with no very good will, however, for he was in mortal dread of
this terrible Cuchillo. It was only by promising him riches in this
world, while the priest threatened him with perdition in the next, that
we at last got him safely upon the box with the reins between his
fingers. Then he was in such a hurry to get off, out of fear lest we
should find ourselves in the dark in the passes, that he hardly gave me
time to renew my vows to the innkeeper's daughter. I cannot at this
moment recall her name, but we wept together as we parted, and I can
remember that she was a very beautiful woman. You will understand, my
friends, that when a man like me, who has fought the men and kissed the
women in fourteen separate kingdoms, gives a word of praise to the one
or the other, it has a little meaning of its own.

The little priest had seemed a trifle grave when we kissed good-bye, but
he soon proved himself the best of companions in the diligence. All the
way he amused me with tales of his little parish up in the mountains,
and I in my turn told him stories about the camp; but, my faith, I had
to pick my steps, for when I said a word too much he would fidget in his
seat and his face would show the pain that I had given him. And of
course it is not the act of a gentleman to talk in anything but a proper
manner to a religious man, though, with all the care in the world, one's
words may get out of hand sometimes.

He had come from the north of Spain, as he told me, and was going to see
his mother in a village of Estremadura, and as he spoke about her little
peasant home, and her joy in seeing him, it brought my own mother so
vividly to my thoughts that the tears started to my eyes. In his
simplicity he showed me the little gifts which he was taking to her, and
so kindly was his manner that I could readily believe him when he said
he was loved wherever he went. He examined my own uniform with as much
curiosity as a child, admiring the plume of my busby, and passing his
fingers through the sable with which my dolman was trimmed. He drew my
sword, too, and then when I told him how many men I had cut down with
it, and set my finger on the notch made by the shoulder-bone of the
Russian Emperor's aide-de-camp, he shuddered and placed the weapon under
the leathern cushion, declaring that it made him sick to look at it.

Well, we had been rolling and creaking on our way whilst this talk had
been going forward, and as we reached the base of the mountains we could
hear the rumbling of cannon far away upon the right. This came from
Massena, who was, as I knew, besieging Ciudad Rodrigo. There was nothing
I should have wished better than to have gone straight to him, for if,
as some said, he had Jewish blood in his veins, he was the best Jew that
I have heard of since Joshua's time. If you were in sight of his beaky
nose and bold, black eyes, you were not likely to miss much of what was
going on. Still, a siege is always a poor sort of a pick-and-shovel
business, and there were better prospects with my hussars in front of
the English. Every mile that passed, my heart grew lighter and lighter,
until I found myself shouting and singing like a young ensign fresh from
St Cyr, just to think of seeing all my fine horses and my gallant
fellows once more.

As we penetrated the mountains the road grew rougher and the pass more
savage. At first we had met a few muleteers, but now the whole country
seemed deserted, which is not to be wondered at when you think that the
French, the English, and the guerillas had each in turn had command over
it. So bleak and wild was it, one great brown wrinkled cliff succeeding
another, and the pass growing narrower and narrower, that I ceased to
look out, but sat in silence, thinking of this and that, of women whom I
had loved and of horses which I had handled. I was suddenly brought back
from my dreams, however, by observing the difficulties of my companion,
who was trying with a sort of brad-awl, which he had drawn out, to bore
a hole through the leathern strap which held up his water-flask. As he
worked with twitching fingers the strap escaped his grasp, and the
wooden bottle fell at my feet. I stooped to pick it up, and as I did so
the priest silently leaped upon my shoulders and drove his brad-awl into
my eye!

My friends, I am, as you know, a man steeled to face every danger. When
one has served from the affair of Zurich to that last fatal day of
Waterloo, and has had the special medal, which I keep at home in a
leathern pouch, one can afford to confess when one is frightened. It may
console some of you, when your own nerves play you tricks, to remember
that you have heard even me, Brigadier Gerard, say that I have been
scared. And besides my terror at this horrible attack, and the maddening
pain of my wound, there was a sudden feeling of loathing such as you
might feel were some filthy tarantula to strike its fangs into you.

I clutched the creature in both hands, and, hurling him on to the floor
of the coach, I stamped on him with my heavy boots. He had drawn a
pistol from the front of his soutane, but I kicked it out of his hand,
and again I fell with my knees upon his chest. Then, for the first time,
he screamed horribly, while I, half blinded, felt about for the sword
which he had so cunningly concealed. My hand had just lighted upon it,
and I was dashing the blood from my face to see where he lay that I
might transfix him, when the whole coach turned partly over upon its
side, and my weapon was jerked out of my grasp by the shock.

Before I could recover myself the door was burst open, and I was
dragged by the heels on to the road. But even as I was torn out on to
the flint stones, and realized that thirty ruffians were standing around
me, I was filled with joy, for my pelisse had been pulled over my head
in the struggle and was covering one of my eyes, and it was with my
wounded eye that I was seeing this gang of brigands. You see for
yourself by this pucker and scar how the thin blade passed between
socket and ball, but it was only at that moment, when I was dragged from
the coach, that I understood that my sight was not gone for ever. The
creature's intention, doubtless, was to drive it through into my brain,
and indeed he loosened some portion of the inner bone of my head, so
that I afterwards had more trouble from that wound than from any one of
the seventeen which I have received.

They dragged me out, these sons of dogs, with curses and execrations,
beating me with their fists and kicking me as I lay upon the ground. I
had frequently observed that the mountaineers wore cloth swathed round
their feet, but never did I imagine that I should have so much cause to
be thankful for it. Presently, seeing the blood upon my head, and that I
lay quiet, they thought that I was unconscious, whereas I was storing
every ugly face among them into my memory, so that I might see them all
safely hanged if ever my chance came round. Brawny rascals they were,
with yellow handkerchiefs round their heads, and great red sashes
stuffed with weapons. They had rolled two rocks across the path, where
it took a sharp turn, and it was these which had torn off one of the
wheels of the coach and upset us. As to this reptile, who had acted the
priest so cleverly and had told me so much of his parish and his mother,
he, of course, had known where the ambuscade was laid, and had attempted
to put me beyond all resistance at the moment when we reached it.

I cannot tell you how frantic their rage was when they drew him out of
the coach and saw the state to which I had reduced him. If he had not
got all his deserts, he had, at least, something as a souvenir of his
meeting with Etienne Gerard, for his legs dangled aimlessly about, and
though the upper part of his body was convulsed with rage and pain, he
sat straight down upon his feet when they tried to set him upright. But
all the time his two little black eyes, which had seemed so kindly and
so innocent in the coach, were glaring at me like a wounded cat, and he
spat, and spat, and spat in my direction. My faith! when the wretches
jerked me on to my feet again, and when I was dragged off up one of the
mountain paths, I understood that a time was coming when I was to need
all my courage and resource. My enemy was carried upon the shoulders of
two men behind me, and I could hear his hissing and his reviling, first
in one ear and then in the other, as I was hurried up the winding track.

I suppose that it must have been for an hour that we ascended, and what
with my wounded ankle and the pain from my eye, and the fear lest this
wound should have spoiled my appearance, I have made no journey to which
I look back with less pleasure. I have never been a good climber at any
time, but it is astonishing what you can do, even with a stiff ankle,
when you have a copper-coloured brigand at each elbow and a nine-inch
blade within touch of your whiskers.

We came at last to a place where the path wound over a ridge, and
descended upon the other side through thick pine-trees into a valley
which opened to the south. In time of peace I had little doubt that the
villains were all smugglers, and that these were the secret paths by
which they crossed the Portuguese frontier. There were many mule-tracks,
and once I was surprised to see the marks of a large horse where a
stream had softened the track. These were explained when, on reaching a
place where there was a clearing in the fir wood, I saw the animal
itself haltered to a fallen tree. My eyes had hardly rested upon it,
when I recognized the great black limbs and the white near fore-leg. It
was the very horse which I had begged for in the morning.

What, then, had become of Commissariat Vidal? Was it possible that
there was another Frenchman in as perilous a plight as myself? The
thought had hardly entered my head when our party stopped and one of
them uttered a peculiar cry. It was answered from among the brambles
which lined the base of a cliff at one side of a clearing, and an
instant later ten or a dozen more brigands came out from amongst them,
and the two parties greeted each other. The new-comers surrounded my
friend of the brad-awl with cries of grief and sympathy, and then,
turning upon me, they brandished their knives and howled at me like the
gang of assassins that they were. So frantic were their gestures that I
was convinced that my end had come, and was just bracing myself to meet
it in a manner which should be worthy of my past reputation, when one of
them gave an order and I was dragged roughly across the little glade to
the brambles from which this new band had emerged.

A narrow pathway led through them to a deep grotto in the side of the
cliff. The sun was already setting outside, and in the cave itself it
would have been quite dark but for a pair of torches which blazed from a
socket on either side. Between them there was sitting at a rude table a
very singular-looking person, whom I saw instantly, from the respect
with which the others addressed him, could be none other than the
brigand chief who had received, on account of his dreadful character,
the sinister name of El Cuchillo.

The man whom I had injured had been carried in and placed upon the top
of a barrel, his helpless legs dangling about in front of him, and his
cat's eyes still darting glances of hatred at me. I understood, from the
snatches of talk which I could follow between the chief and him, that he
was the lieutenant of the band, and that part of his duties was to lie
in wait with his smooth tongue and his peaceful garb for travellers like
myself. When I thought of how many gallant officers may have been lured
to their death by this monster of hypocrisy, it gave me a glow of
pleasure to think that I had brought his villainies to an end--though I
feared it would be at the price of a life which neither the Emperor nor
the army could well spare.

As the injured man still supported upon the barrel by two comrades, was
explaining in Spanish all that had befallen him, I was held by several
of the villains in front of the table at which the chief was seated, and
had an excellent opportunity of observing him. I have seldom seen any
man who was less like my idea of a brigand, and especially of a brigand
with such a reputation that in a land of cruelty he had earned so dark a
nickname. His face was bluff and broad and bland, with ruddy cheeks and
comfortable little tufts of side-whiskers, which gave him the appearance
of a well-to-do grocer of the Rue St Antoine. He had not any of those
flaring sashes or gleaming weapons which distinguished his followers,
but on the contrary he wore a good broadcloth coat like a respectable
father of a family, and save for his brown leggings there was nothing to
indicate a life among the mountains. His surroundings, too, corresponded
with himself, and beside his snuff-box upon the table there stood a
great brown book, which looked like a commercial ledger. Many other
books were ranged along a plank between two powder-casks, and there was
a great litter of papers, some of which had verses scribbled upon them.
All this I took in while he, leaning indolently back in his chair, was
listening to the report of his lieutenant. Having heard everything, he
ordered the cripple to be carried out again, and I was left with my
three guards, waiting to hear my fate. He took up his pen, and tapping
his forehead with the handle of it, he pursed up his lips and looked out
of the corner of his eyes at the roof of the grotto.

'I suppose,' said he at last, speaking very excellent French, 'that you
are not able to suggest a rhyme for the word Covilha.'

I answered him that my acquaintance with the Spanish language was so
limited that I was unable to oblige him.

'It is a rich language,' said he, 'but less prolific in rhymes than
either the German or the English. That is why our best work has been
done in blank verse, a form of composition which is capable of reaching
great heights. But I fear that such subjects are somewhat outside the
range of a hussar.'

I was about to answer that if they were good enough for a guerilla, they
could not be too much for the light cavalry, but he was already stooping
over his half-finished verse. Presently he threw down the pen with an
exclamation of satisfaction, and declaimed a few lines which drew a cry
of approval from the three ruffians who held me. His broad face blushed
like a young girl who receives her first compliment.

'The critics are in my favour, it appears,' said he; 'we amuse ourselves
in our long evenings by singing our own ballads, you understand. I have
some little facility in that direction, and I do not at all despair of
seeing some of my poor efforts in print before long, and with "Madrid"
upon the title-page, too. But we must get back to business. May I ask
what your name is?'

'Etienne Gerard.'

'Rank?'

'Colonel.'

'Corps?'

'The Third Hussars of Conflans.'

'You are young for a colonel.'

'My career has been an eventful one.'

'Tut, that makes it the sadder,' said he, with his bland smile.

I made no answer to that, but I tried to show him by my bearing that I
was ready for the worst which could befall me.

'By the way, I rather fancy that we have had some of your corps here,'
said he, turning over the pages of his big brown register. 'We
endeavour to keep a record of our operations. Here is a heading under
June 24th. Have you not a young officer named Soubiron, a tall, slight
youth with light hair?'

'Certainly.'

'I see that we buried him upon that date.'

'Poor lad!' I cried. 'And how did he die?'

'We buried him.'

'But before you buried him?'

'You misunderstand me, Colonel. He was not dead before we buried him.'

'You buried him alive!'

For a moment I was too stunned to act. Then I hurled myself upon the
man, as he sat with that placid smile of his upon his lips, and I would
have torn his throat out had the three wretches not dragged me away from
him. Again and again I made for him, panting and cursing, shaking off
this man and that, straining and wrenching, but never quite free. At
last, with my jacket torn nearly off my back and blood dripping from my
wrists, I was hauled backwards in the bight of a rope and cords passed
round my ankles and my arms.

'You sleek hound!' I cried. 'If ever I have you at my sword's point, I
will teach you to maltreat one of my lads. You will find, you
bloodthirsty beast, that my Emperor has long arms, and though you lie
here like a rat in its hole, the time will come when he will tear you
out of it, and you and your vermin will perish together.'

My faith, I have a rough side to my tongue, and there was not a hard
word that I had learned in fourteen campaigns which I did not let fly at
him; but he sat with the handle of his pen tapping against his forehead
and his eyes squinting up at the roof as if he had conceived the idea of
some new stanza. It was this occupation of his which showed me how I
might get my point into him.

'You spawn!' said I; 'you think that you are safe here, but your life
may be as short as that of your absurd verses, and God knows that it
could not be shorter than that.'

Ah, you should have seen him bound from his chair when I said the words.
This vile monster, who dispensed death and torture as a grocer serves
out his figs, had one raw nerve then which I could prod at pleasure. His
face grew livid, and those little bourgeois side-whiskers quivered and
thrilled with passion.

'Very good, Colonel. You have said enough,' he cried, in a choking
voice. 'You say that you have had a very distinguished career. I promise
you also a very distinguished ending. Colonel Etienne Gerard of the
Third Hussars shall have a death of his own.'

'And I only beg,' said I, 'that you will not commemorate it in verse.' I
had one or two little ironies to utter, but he cut me short by a furious
gesture which caused my three guards to drag me from the cave.

Our interview, which I have told you as nearly as I can remember it,
must have lasted some time, for it was quite dark when we came out, and
the moon was shining very clearly in the heavens. The brigands had
lighted a great fire of the dried branches of the fir-trees; not, of
course, for warmth, since the night was already very sultry, but to cook
their evening meal. A huge copper pot hung over the blaze, and the
rascals were lying all round in the yellow glare, so that the scene
looked like one of those pictures which Junot stole out of Madrid. There
are some soldiers who profess to care nothing for art and the like, but
I have always been drawn towards it myself, in which respect I show my
good taste and my breeding. I remember, for example, that when Lefebvre
was selling the plunder after the fall of Danzig, I bought a very fine
picture, called 'Nymphs Surprised in a Wood,' and I carried it with me
through two campaigns, until my charger had the misfortune to put his
hoof through it.

I only tell you this, however, to show you that I was never a mere
rough soldier like Rapp or Ney. As I lay in that brigands' camp, I had
little time or inclination to think about such matters. They had thrown
me down under a tree, the three villains squatting round and smoking
their cigarettes within hands' touch of me. What to do I could not
imagine. In my whole career I do not suppose that I have ten times been
in as hopeless a situation. 'But courage,' thought I. 'Courage, my brave
boy! You were not made a Colonel of Hussars at twenty-eight because you
could dance a cotillon. You are a picked man, Etienne; a man who has
come through more than two hundred affairs, and this little one is
surely not going to be the last.' I began eagerly to glance about for
some chance of escape, and as I did so I saw something which filled me
with great astonishment.

I have already told you that a large fire was burning in the centre of
the glade. What with its glare, and what with the moonlight, everything
was as clear as possible. On the other side of the glade there was a
single tall fir-tree which attracted my attention because its trunk and
lower branches were discoloured, as if a large fire had recently been
lit underneath it. A clump of bushes grew in front of it which concealed
the base. Well, as I looked towards it, I was surprised to see
projecting above the bush, and fastened apparently to the tree, a pair
of fine riding boots with the toes upwards. At first I thought that they
were tied there, but as I looked harder I saw that they were secured by
a great nail which was hammered through the foot of each. And then,
suddenly, with a thrill of horror, I understood that these were not
empty boots; and moving my head a little to the right, I was able to see
who it was that had been fastened there, and why a fire had been lit
beneath the tree. It is not pleasant to speak or to think of horrors, my
friends, and I do not wish to give any of you bad dreams tonight--but I
cannot take you among the Spanish guerillas without showing you what
kind of men they were, and the sort of warfare that they waged. I will
only say that I understood why Monsieur Vidal's horse was waiting
masterless in the grove, and that I hoped he had met this terrible fate
with sprightliness and courage, as a good Frenchman ought.

It was not a very cheering sight for me, as you can imagine. When I had
been with their chief in the grotto I had been so carried away by my
rage at the cruel death of young Soubiron, who was one of the brightest
lads who ever threw his thigh over a charger, that I had never given a
thought to my own position. Perhaps it would have been more politic had
I spoken the ruffian fair, but it was too late now. The cork was drawn
and I must drain the wine. Besides, if the harmless commissariat man
were put to such a death, what hope was there for me, who had snapped
the spine of their lieutenant? No, I was doomed in any case, and it was
as well perhaps that I should have put the best face on the matter. This
beast could bear witness that Etienne Gerard had died as he had lived,
and that one prisoner at least had not quailed before him. I lay there
thinking of the various girls who would mourn for me, and of my dear old
mother, and of the deplorable loss which I should be, both to my
regiment and to the Emperor, and I am not ashamed to confess to you that
I shed tears as I thought of the general consternation which my
premature end would give rise to.

But all the time I was taking the very keenest notice of everything
which might possibly help me. I am not a man who would lie like a sick
horse waiting for the farrier sergeant and the pole-axe. First I would
give a little tug at my ankle cords, and then another at those which
were round my wrists, and all the time that I was trying to loosen them
I was peering round to see if I could find something which was in my
favour. There was one thing which was very evident. A hussar is but half
formed without a horse, and there was my other half quietly grazing
within thirty yards of me. Then I observed yet another thing. The path
by which we had come over the mountains was so steep that a horse could
only be led across it slowly and with difficulty, but in the other
direction the ground appeared to be more open, and to lead straight down
into a gently-sloping valley. Had I but my feet in yonder stirrups and
my sabre in my hand, a single bold dash might take me out of the power
of these vermin of the rocks.

I was still thinking it over and straining with my wrists and my ankles,
when their chief came out from his grotto, and after some talk with his
lieutenant, who lay groaning near the fire, they both nodded their heads
and looked across at me. He then said some few words to the band, who
clapped their hands and laughed uproariously. Things looked ominous, and
I was delighted to feel that my hands were so far free that I could
easily slip them through the cords if I wished. But with my ankles I
feared that I could do nothing, for when I strained it brought such pain
into my lance-wound that I had to gnaw my moustache to keep from crying
out. I could only lie still, half-free and half-bound, and see what turn
things were likely to take.

For a little I could not make out what they were after. One of the
rascals climbed up a well-grown fir-tree upon one side of the glade, and
tied a rope round the top of the trunk. He then fastened another rope in
the same fashion to a similar tree upon the other side. The two loose
ends were now dangling down, and I waited with some curiosity, and just
a little trepidation also, to see what they would do next. The whole
band pulled upon one of the ropes until they had bent the strong young
tree down into a semi-circle, and they then fastened it to a stump, so
as to hold it so. When they had bent the other tree down in a similar
fashion, the two summits were within a few feet of each other, though,
as you understand, they would each spring back into their original
position the instant that they were released. I already saw the
diabolical plan which these miscreants had formed.

'I presume that you are a strong man, Colonel,' said the chief, coming
towards me with his hateful smile.

'If you will have the kindness to loosen these cords,' I answered, 'I
will show you how strong I am.'

'We were all interested to see whether you were as strong as these two
young saplings,' said he. 'It is our intention, you see, to tie one end
of each rope round your ankles and then let the trees go. If you are
stronger than the trees, then, of course, no harm would be done; if, on
the other hand, the trees are stronger than you, why, in that case,
Colonel, we may have a souvenir of you upon each side of our little
glade.'

He laughed as he spoke, and at the sight of it the whole forty of them
laughed also. Even now if I am in my darker humour, or if I have a touch
of my old Lithuanian ague, I see in my sleep that ring of dark, savage
faces, with their cruel eyes, and the firelight flashing upon their
strong white teeth.

It is astonishing--and I have heard many make the same remark--how acute
one's senses become at such a crisis as this. I am convinced that at no
moment is one living so vividly, so acutely, as at the instant when a
violent and foreseen death overtakes one. I could smell the resinous
fagots, I could see every twig upon the ground, I could hear every
rustle of the branches, as I have never smelled or seen or heard save at
such times of danger. And so it was that long before anyone else, before
even the time when the chief had addressed me, I had heard a low,
monotonous sound, far away indeed, and yet coming nearer at every
instant. At first it was but a murmur, a rumble, but by the time he had
finished speaking, while the assassins were untying my ankles in order
to lead me to the scene of my murder, I heard, as plainly as ever I
heard anything in my life, the clinking of horseshoes and the jingling
of bridle-chains, with the clank of sabres against stirrup-irons. Is it
likely that I, who had lived with the light cavalry since the first hair
shaded my lip, would mistake the sound of troopers on the march?

'Help, comrades, help!' I shrieked, and though they struck me across
the mouth and tried to drag me up to the trees, I kept on yelling, 'Help
me, my brave boys! Help me, my children! They are murdering your
colonel!'

For the moment my wounds and my troubles had brought on a delirium, and
I looked for nothing less than my five hundred hussars, kettle-drums and
all, to appear at the opening of the glade.

But that which really appeared was very different to anything which I
had conceived. Into the clear space there came galloping a fine young
man upon a most beautiful roan horse. He was fresh-faced and
pleasant-looking, with the most debonair bearing in the world and the
most gallant way of carrying himself--a way which reminded me somewhat
of my own. He wore a singular coat which had once been red all over, but
which was now stained to the colour of a withered oak-leaf wherever the
weather could reach it. His shoulder-straps, however, were of golden
lace, and he had a bright metal helmet upon his head, with a coquettish
white plume upon one side of its crest. He trotted his horse up the
glade, while behind him rode four cavaliers in the same dress--all
clean-shaven, with round, comely faces, looking to me more like monks
than dragoons. At a short, gruff order they halted with a rattle of
arms, while their leader cantered forward, the fire beating upon his
eager face and the beautiful head of his charger. I knew, of course, by
the strange coats that they were English. It was the first sight that I
had ever had of them, but from their stout bearing and their masterful
way I could see at a glance that what I had always been told was true,
and that they were excellent people to fight against.

'Well, well, well!' cried the young officer, in sufficiently bad French,
'what game are you up to here? Who was that who was yelling for help,
and what are you trying to do to him?'

It was at that moment that I learned to bless those months which
Obriant, the descendant of the Irish kings, had spent in teaching me the
tongue of the English. My ankles had just been freed, so that I had only
to slip my hands out of the cords, and with a single rush I had flown
across, picked up my sabre where it lay by the fire, and hurled myself
on to the saddle of poor Vidal's horse. Yes, for all my wounded ankle, I
never put foot to stirrup, but was in the seat in a single bound. I tore
the halter from the tree, and before these villains could so much as
snap a pistol at me I was beside the English officer.

'I surrender to you, sir,' I cried; though I daresay my English was not
very much better than his French. 'If you will look at that tree to the
left you will see what these villains do to the honourable gentlemen who
fall into their hands.'

The fire had flared up at that moment, and there was poor Vidal exposed
before them, as horrible an object as one could see in a nightmare.
'Godam!' cried the officer, and 'Godam!' cried each of the four
troopers, which is the same as with us when we cry 'Mon Dieu!' Out
rasped the five swords, and the four men closed up. One, who wore a
sergeant's chevrons, laughed and clapped me on the shoulder.

'Fight for your skin, froggy,' said he.

Ah, it was so fine to have a horse between my thighs and a weapon in my
grip. I waved it above my head and shouted in my exultation. The chief
had come forward with that odious smiling face of his.

'Your excellency will observe that this Frenchman is our prisoner,' said
he.

'You are a rascally robber,' said the Englishman, shaking his sword at
him. 'It is a disgrace to us to have such allies. By my faith, if Lord
Wellington were of my mind we would swing you up on the nearest tree.'

'But my prisoner?' said the brigand, in his suave voice.

'He shall come with us to the British camp.'

'Just a word in your ear before you take him.'

He approached the young officer, and then turning as quick as a flash,
he fired his pistol in my face. The bullet scored its way through my
hair and burst a hole on each side of my busby. Seeing that he had
missed me, he raised the pistol and was about to hurl it at me when the
English sergeant, with a single back-handed cut, nearly severed his head
from his body. His blood had not reached the ground, nor the last curse
died on his lips, before the whole horde was upon us, but with a dozen
bounds and as many slashes we were all safely out of the glade, and
galloping down the winding track which led to the valley.

It was not until we had left the ravine far behind us and were right out
in the open fields that we ventured to halt, and to see what injuries we
had sustained. For me, wounded and weary as I was, my heart was beating
proudly, and my chest was nearly bursting my tunic to think that I,
Etienne Gerard, had left this gang of murderers so much by which to
remember me. My faith, they would think twice before they ventured again
to lay hands upon one of the Third Hussars. So carried away was I that I
made a small oration to these brave Englishmen, and told them who it was
that they had helped to rescue. I would have spoken of glory also, and
of the sympathies of brave men, but the officer cut me short.

'That's all right,' said he. 'Any injuries, Sergeant?'

'Trooper Jones's horse hit with a pistol bullet on the fetlock.'

'Trooper Jones to go with us. Sergeant Halliday, with troopers Harvey
and Smith, to keep to the right until they touch the vedettes of the
German Hussars.'

So these three jingled away together, while the officer and I, followed
at some distance by the trooper whose horse had been wounded, rode
straight down in the direction of the English camp. Very soon we had
opened our hearts, for we each liked the other from the beginning. He
was of the nobility, this brave lad, and he had been sent out scouting
by Lord Wellington to see if there were any signs of our advancing
through the mountains. It is one advantage of a wandering life like
mine, that you learn to pick up those bits of knowledge which
distinguish the man of the world. I have, for example, hardly ever met a
Frenchman who could repeat an English title correctly. If I had not
travelled I should not be able to say with confidence that this young
man's real name was Milor the Hon. Sir Russell, Bart., this last being
an honourable distinction, so that it was as the Bart that I usually
addressed him, just as in Spanish one might say 'the Don.'

As we rode beneath the moonlight in the lovely Spanish night, we spoke
our minds to each other, as if we were brothers. We were both of an age,
you see, both of the light cavalry also (the Sixteenth Light Dragoons
was his regiment), and both with the same hopes and ambitions. Never
have I learned to know a man so quickly as I did the Bart. He gave me
the name of a girl whom he had loved at a garden called Vauxhall, and,
for my own part, I spoke to him of little Coralie, of the Opera. He took
a lock of hair from his bosom, and I a garter. Then we nearly quarrelled
over hussar and dragoon, for he was absurdly proud of his regiment, and
you should have seen him curl his lip and clap his hand to his hilt when
I said that I hoped it might never be its misfortune to come in the way
of the Third. Finally, he began to speak about what the English call
sport, and he told such stories of the money which he had lost over
which of two cocks could kill the other, or which of two men could
strike the other the most in a fight for a prize, that I was filled with
astonishment. He was ready to bet upon anything in the most wonderful
manner, and when I chanced to see a shooting star he was anxious to bet
that he would see more than me, twenty-five francs a star, and it was
only when I explained that my purse was in the hands of the brigands
that he would give over the idea.

Well, we chatted away in this very amiable fashion until the day began
to break, when suddenly we heard a great volley of musketry from
somewhere in front of us. It was very rocky and broken ground, and I
thought, although I could see nothing, that a general engagement had
broken out. The Bart laughed at my idea, however, and explained that the
sound came from the English camp, where every man emptied his piece each
morning so as to make sure of having a dry priming.

'In another mile we shall be up with the outposts,' said he.

I glanced round at this, and I perceived that we had trotted along at so
good a pace during the time that we were keeping up our pleasant chat,
that the dragoon with the lame horse was altogether out of sight. I
looked on every side, but in the whole of that vast rocky valley there
was no one save only the Bart and I--both of us armed, you understand,
and both of us well mounted. I began to ask myself whether after all it
was quite necessary that I should ride that mile which would bring me to
the British outposts.

Now, I wish to be very clear with you on this point, my friends, for I
would not have you think that I was acting dishonourably or ungratefully
to the man who had helped me away from the brigands. You must remember
that of all duties the strongest is that which a commanding officer owes
to his men. You must also bear in mind that war is a game which is
played under fixed rules, and when these rules are broken one must at
once claim the forfeit. If, for example, I had given a parole, then I
should have been an infamous wretch had I dreamed of escaping. But no
parole had been asked of me. Out of over-confidence, and the chance of
the lame horse dropping behind, the Bart had permitted me to get upon
equal terms with him. Had it been I who had taken him, I should have
used him as courteously as he had me, but, at the same time, I should
have respected his enterprise so far as to have deprived him of his
sword, and seen that I had at least one guard beside myself. I reined
up my horse and explained this to him, asking him at the same time
whether he saw any breach of honour in my leaving him.

He thought about it, and several times repeated that which the English
say when they mean 'Mon Dieu.'

'You would give me the slip, would you?' said he.

'If you can give no reason against it.'

'The only reason that I can think of,' said the Bart, 'is that I should
instantly cut your head off if you were to attempt it.'

'Two can play at that game, my dear Bart,' said I.

'Then we'll see who can play at it best,' he cried, pulling out his
sword.

I had drawn mine also, but I was quite determined not to hurt this
admirable young man who had been my benefactor.

'Consider,' said I, 'you say that I am your prisoner. I might with equal
reason say that you are mine. We are alone here, and though I have no
doubt that you are an excellent swordsman, you can hardly hope to hold
your own against the best blade in the six light cavalry brigades.'

His answer was a cut at my head. I parried and shore off half of his
white plume. He thrust at my breast. I turned his point and cut away the
other half of his cockade.

'Curse your monkey-tricks!' he cried, as I wheeled my horse away from
him.

'Why should you strike at me?' said I. 'You see that I will not strike
back.'

'That's all very well,' said he; 'but you've got to come along with me
to the camp.'

'I shall never see the camp,' said I.

'I'll lay you nine to four you do,' he cried, as he made at me, sword in
hand.

But those words of his put something new into my head. Could we not
decide the matter in some better way than fighting? The Bart was
placing me in such a position that I should have to hurt him, or he
would certainly hurt me. I avoided his rush, though his sword-point was
within an inch of my neck.

'I have a proposal,' I cried. 'We shall throw dice as to which is the
prisoner of the other.'

He smiled at this. It appealed to his love of sport.

'Where are your dice?' he cried.

'I have none.'

'Nor I. But I have cards.'

'Cards let it be,' said I.

'And the game?'

'I leave it to you.'

'Écarté, then--the best of three.'

I could not help smiling as I agreed, for I do not suppose that there
were three men in France who were my masters at the game. I told the
Bart as much as we dismounted. He smiled also as he listened.

'I was counted the best player at Watier's,' said he. 'With even luck
you deserve to get off if you beat me.'

So we tethered our two horses and sat down one on either side of a great
flat rock. The Bart took a pack of cards out of his tunic, and I had
only to see him shuffle to convince me that I had no novice to deal
with. We cut, and the deal fell to him.

My faith, it was a stake worth playing for. He wished to add a hundred
gold pieces a game, but what was money when the fate of Colonel Etienne
Gerard hung upon the cards? I felt as though all those who had reason to
be interested in the game--my mother, my hussars, the Sixth Corps
d'Armée, Ney, Massena, even the Emperor himself--were forming a ring
round us in that desolate valley. Heavens, what a blow to one and all of
them should the cards go against me! But I was confident, for my écarté
play was as famous as my swordsmanship, and save old Bouvet of the
Hussars of Bercheny, who won seventy-six out of one hundred and fifty
games off me, I have always had the best of a series.

The first game I won right off, though I must confess that the cards
were with me, and that my adversary could have done no more. In the
second, I never played better and saved a trick by a finesse, but the
Bart voled me once, marked the king, and ran out in the second hand. My
faith, we were so excited that he laid his helmet down beside him and I
my busby.

'I'll lay my roan mare against your black horse,' said he.

'Done!' said I.

'Sword against sword.'

'Done!' said I.

'Saddle, bridle, and stirrups!' he cried.

'Done!' I shouted.

I had caught this spirit of sport from him. I would have laid my hussars
against his dragoons had they been ours to pledge.

And then began the game of games. Oh, he played, this Englishman--he
played in a way that was worthy of such a stake. But I, my friends, I
was superb! Of the five which I had to make to win, I gained three on
the first hand. The Bart bit his moustache and drummed his hands, while
I already felt myself at the head of my dear little rascals. On the
second, I turned the king, but lost two tricks--and my score was four to
his two. When I saw my next hand I could not but give a cry of delight.
'If I cannot gain my freedom on this,' thought I, 'I deserve to remain
for ever in chains.'

Give me the cards, landlord, and I will lay them out on the table for
you.

Here was my hand: knave and ace of clubs, queen and knave of diamonds,
and king of hearts. Clubs were trumps, mark you, and I had but one point
between me and freedom. He knew it was the crisis, and he undid his
tunic. I threw my dolman on the ground. He led the ten of spades. I took
it with my ace of trumps. One point in my favour. The correct play was
to clear the trumps, and I led the knave. Down came the queen upon it,
and the game was equal. He led the eight of spades, and I could only
discard my queen of diamonds. Then came the seven of spades, and the
hair stood straight up on my head. We each threw down a king at the
final. He had won two points, and my beautiful hand had been mastered by
his inferior one. I could have rolled on the ground as I thought of it.
They used to play very good écarté at Watier's in the year '10. I say
it--I, Brigadier Gerard.

The last game was now four all. This next hand must settle it one way or
the other. He undid his sash, and I put away my sword-belt. He was cool,
this Englishman, and I tried to be so also, but the perspiration would
trickle into my eyes. The deal lay with him, and I may confess to you,
my friends, that my hands shook so that I could hardly pick my cards
from the rock. But when I raised them, what was the first thing that my
eyes rested upon? It was the king, the king, the glorious king of
trumps! My mouth was open to declare it when the words were frozen upon
my lips by the appearance of my comrade.

He held his cards in his hand, but his jaw had fallen, and his eyes were
staring over my shoulder with the most dreadful expression of
consternation and surprise. I whisked round, and I was myself amazed at
what I saw.

Three men were standing quite close to us--fifteen mètres at the
farthest. The middle one was of a good height, and yet not too
tall--about the same height, in fact, that I am myself. He was clad in a
dark uniform with a small cocked hat, and some sort of white plume upon
the side. But I had little thought of his dress. It was his face, his
gaunt cheeks, his beak-like nose, his masterful blue eyes, his thin,
firm slit of a mouth which made one feel that this was a wonderful man,
a man of a million. His brows were tied into a knot, and he cast such a
glance at my poor Bart from under them that one by one the cards came
fluttering down from his nerveless fingers. Of the two other men, one,
who had a face as brown and hard as though it had been carved out of old
oak, wore a bright red coat, while the other, a fine portly man with
bushy side-whiskers, was in a blue jacket with gold facings. Some little
distance behind, three orderlies were holding as many horses, and an
escort of dragoons was waiting in the rear.

'Heh, Crauford, what the deuce is this?' asked the thin man.

'D'you hear, sir?' cried the man with the red coat. 'Lord Wellington
wants to know what this means.'

My poor Bart broke into an account of all that had occurred, but that
rock-face never softened for an instant.

'Pretty fine, 'pon my word, General Crauford,' he broke in. 'The
discipline of this force must be maintained, sir. Report yourself at
headquarters as a prisoner.'

It was dreadful to me to see the Bart mount his horse and ride off with
hanging head. I could not endure it. I threw myself before this English
General. I pleaded with him for my friend. I told him how I, Colonel
Gerard, would witness what a dashing young officer he was. Ah, my
eloquence might have melted the hardest heart; I brought tears to my own
eyes, but none to his. My voice broke, and I could say no more.

'What weight do you put on your mules, sir, in the French service?' he
asked. Yes, that was all this phlegmatic Englishman had to answer to
these burning words of mine. That was his reply to what would have made
a Frenchman weep upon my shoulder.

'What weight on a mule?' asked the man with the red coat.

'Two hundred and ten pounds,' said I.

'Then you load them deucedly badly,' said Lord Wellington. 'Remove the
prisoner to the rear.'

His dragoons closed in upon me, and I--I was driven mad, as I thought
that the game had been in my hands, and that I ought at that moment to
be a free man. I held the cards up in front of the General.

'See, my lord!' I cried; 'I played for my freedom and I won, for, as you
perceive, I hold the king.'

For the first time a slight smile softened his gaunt face.

'On the contrary,' said he, as he mounted his horse, 'it is I who won,
for, as you perceive, my King holds you.'




4. HOW THE KING HELD THE BRIGADIER


Murat was undoubtedly an excellent cavalry officer, but he had too much
swagger, which spoils many a good soldier. Lasalle, too, was a very
dashing leader, but he ruined himself with wine and folly. Now I,
Etienne Gerard, was always totally devoid of swagger, and at the same
time I was very abstemious, except, maybe, at the end of a campaign, or
when I met an old comrade-in-arms. For these reasons I might, perhaps,
had it not been for a certain diffidence, have claimed to be the most
valuable officer in my own branch of the Service. It is true that I
never rose to be more than a chief of brigade, but then, as everyone
knows, no one had a chance of rising to the top unless he had the good
fortune to be with the Emperor in his early campaigns. Except Lasalle,
and Labau, and Drouet, I can hardly remember any one of the generals who
had not already made his name before the Egyptian business. Even I, with
all my brilliant qualities, could only attain the head of my brigade,
and also the special medal of honour, which I received from the Emperor
himself, and which I keep at home in a leathern pouch.

But though I never rose higher than this, my qualities were very well
known to those who had served with me, and also to the English. After
they had captured me in the way which I described to you the other
night, they kept a very good guard over me at Oporto, and I promise you
that they did not give such a formidable opponent a chance of slipping
through their fingers. It was on the 10th of August that I was escorted
on board the transport which was to take us to England, and behold me
before the end of the month in the great prison which had been built for
us at Dartmoor!

'L'hôtel Français, et Pension,' we used to call it, for you understand
that we were all brave men there, and that we did not lose our spirits
because we were in adversity.

It was only those officers who refused to give their parole who were
confined at Dartmoor, and most of the prisoners were seamen, or from the
ranks. You ask me, perhaps, why it was that I did not give this parole,
and so enjoy the same good treatment as most of my brother officers.
Well, I had two reasons, and both of them were sufficiently strong.

In the first place, I had so much confidence in myself, that I was quite
convinced that I could escape. In the second, my family, though of good
repute, has never been wealthy, and I could not bring myself to take
anything from the small income of my mother. On the other hand, it would
never do for a man like me to be outshone by the bourgeois society of an
English country town, or to be without the means of showing courtesies
and attentions to those ladies whom I should attract. It was for these
reasons that I preferred to be buried in the dreadful prison of
Dartmoor. I wish now to tell you of my adventures in England, and how
far Milor Wellington's words were true when he said that his King would
hold me.

And first of all I may say that if it were not that I have set off to
tell you about what befell myself, I could keep you here until morning
with my stories about Dartmoor itself, and about the singular things
which occurred there. It was one of the very strangest places in the
whole world, for there, in the middle of that great desolate waste, were
herded together seven or eight thousand men--warriors, you understand,
men of experience and courage. Around there were a double wall and a
ditch, and warders and soldiers; but, my faith! you could not coop men
like that up like rabbits in a hutch! They would escape by twos and tens
and twenties, and then the cannon would boom, and the search parties
run, and we, who were left behind, would laugh and dance and shout
'Vive l'Empereur' until the warders would turn their muskets upon us in
their passion. And then we would have our little mutinies, too, and up
would come the infantry and the guns from Plymouth, and that would set
us yelling 'Vive l'Empereur' once more, as though we wished them to hear
us in Paris. We had lively moments at Dartmoor, and we contrived that
those who were about us should be lively also.

You must know that the prisoners there had their own Courts of Justice,
in which they tried their own cases, and inflicted their own
punishments. Stealing and quarrelling were punished--but most of all
treachery. When I came there first there was a man, Meunier, from
Rheims, who had given information of some plot to escape. Well, that
night, owing to some form or other which had to be gone through, they
did not take him out from among the other prisoners, and though he wept
and screamed, and grovelled upon the ground, they left him there amongst
the comrades whom he had betrayed. That night there was a trial with a
whispered accusation and a whispered defence, a gagged prisoner, and a
judge whom none could see. In the morning, when they came for their man
with papers for his release, there was not as much of him left as you
could put upon your thumb-nail. They were ingenious people, these
prisoners, and they had their own way of managing.

We officers, however, lived in a separate wing, and a very singular
group of people we were. They had left us our uniforms, so that there
was hardly a corps which had served under Victor, or Massena, or Ney,
which was not represented there, and some had been there from the time
when Junot was beaten at Vimiera. We had chasseurs in their green
tunics, and hussars, like myself, and blue-coated dragoons, and
white-fronted lancers, and voltigeurs, and grenadiers, and the men of
the artillery and engineers. But the greater part were naval officers,
for the English had had the better of us upon the seas. I could never
understand this until I journeyed myself from Oporto to Plymouth, when
I lay for seven days upon my back, and could not have stirred had I seen
the eagle of the regiment carried off before my eyes. It was in
perfidious weather like this that Nelson took advantage of us.

I had no sooner got into Dartmoor than I began to plan to get out again,
and you can readily believe that, with wits sharpened by twelve years of
warfare, it was not very long before I saw my way.

You must know, in the first place, that I had a very great advantage in
having some knowledge of the English language. I learned it during the
months that I spent before Danzig, from Adjutant Obriant, of the
Regiment Irlandais, who was sprung from the ancient kings of the
country. I was quickly able to speak it with some facility, for I do not
take long to master anything to which I set my mind. In three months I
could not only express my meaning, but I could use the idioms of the
people. It was Obriant who taught me to say 'Be jabers,' just as we
might say 'Ma foi'; and also 'The curse of Crummle!' which means 'Ventre
bleu!' Many a time I have seen the English smile with pleasure when they
have heard me speak so much like one of themselves.

We officers were put two in a cell, which was very little to my taste,
for my room-mate was a tall, silent man named Beaumont, of the Flying
Artillery, who had been taken by the English cavalry at Astorga.

It is seldom I meet a man of whom I cannot make a friend, for my
disposition and manners are--as you know them. But this fellow had never
a smile for my jests, nor an ear for my sorrows, but would sit looking
at me with his sullen eyes, until sometimes I thought that his two years
of captivity had driven him crazy. Ah, how I longed that old Bouvet, or
any of my comrades of the hussars, was there, instead of this mummy of a
man. But such as he was I had to make the best of him, and it was very
evident that no escape could be made unless he were my partner in it,
for what could I possibly do without him observing me? I hinted at it,
therefore, and then by degrees I spoke more plainly, until it seemed to
me that I had prevailed upon him to share my lot.

I tried the walls, and I tried the floor, and I tried the ceiling, but
though I tapped and probed, they all appeared to be very thick and
solid. The door was of iron, shutting with a spring lock, and provided
with a small grating, through which a warder looked twice in every
night. Within there were two beds, two stools, two washstands--nothing
more. It was enough for my wants, for when had I had as much during
those twelve years spent in camps? But how was I to get out? Night after
night I thought of my five hundred hussars, and had dreadful nightmares,
in which I fancied that the whole regiment needed shoeing, or that my
horses were all bloated with green fodder, or that they were foundered
from bogland, or that six squadrons were clubbed in the presence of the
Emperor. Then I would awake in a cold sweat, and set to work picking and
tapping at the walls once more; for I knew very well that there is no
difficulty which cannot be overcome by a ready brain and a pair of
cunning hands.

There was a single window in our cell, which was too small to admit a
child. It was further defended by a thick iron bar in the centre. It was
not a very promising point of escape, as you will allow, but I became
more and more convinced that our efforts must be directed towards it. To
make matters worse, it only led out into the exercise yard, which was
surrounded by two high walls. Still, as I said to my sullen comrade, it
is time to talk of the Vistula when you are over the Rhine. I got a
small piece of iron, therefore, from the fittings of my bed, and I set
to work to loosen the plaster at the top and the bottom of the bar.
Three hours I would work, and then leap into my bed upon the sound of
the warder's step. Then another three hours, and then very often another
yet, for I found that Beaumont was so slow and clumsy at it that it was
on myself only that I could rely.

I pictured to myself my Third of Hussars waiting just outside that
window, with kettle-drums and standards and leopard-skin schabraques all
complete. Then I would work like a madman, until my iron was crusted
with blood, as if with rust. And so, night by night, I loosened that
stony plaster, and hid it away in the stuffing of my pillow, until the
hour came when the iron shook; and then with one good wrench it came off
in my hand, and my first step had been made towards freedom.

You will ask me what better off I was, since, as I have said, a child
could not have fitted through the opening. I will tell you. I had gained
two things--a tool and a weapon. With the one I might loosen the stone
which flanked the window. With the other I might defend myself when I
had scrambled through. So now I turned my attention to that stone, and I
picked and picked with the sharpened end of my bar until I had worked
out the mortar all round. You understand, of course, that during the day
I replaced everything in its position, and that the warder was never
permitted to see a speck upon the floor. At the end of three weeks I had
separated the stone, and had the rapture of drawing it through, and
seeing a hole left with ten stars shining through it, where there had
been but four before. All was ready for us now, and I had replaced the
stone, smearing the edges of it round with a little fat and soot, so as
to hide the cracks where the mortar should have been. In three nights
the moon would be gone, and that seemed the best time for our attempt.

I had now no doubt at all about getting into the yards, but I had very
considerable misgivings as to how I was to get out again. It would be
too humiliating, after trying here, and trying there, to have to go back
to my hole again in despair, or to be arrested by the guards outside,
and thrown into those damp underground cells which are reserved for
prisoners who are caught in escaping. I set to work, therefore, to plan
what I should do. I have never, as you know, had the chance of showing
what I could do as a general. Sometimes, after a glass or two of wine, I
have found myself capable of thinking out surprising combinations, and
have felt that if Napoleon had intrusted me with an army corps, things
might have gone differently with him. But however that may be, there is
no doubt that in the small stratagems of war, and in that quickness of
invention which is so necessary for an officer of light cavalry, I could
hold my own against anyone. It was now that I had need of it, and I felt
sure that it would not fail me.

The inner wall which I had to scale was built of bricks, 12ft. high,
with a row of iron spikes, 3in. apart upon the top. The outer I had only
caught a glimpse of once or twice, when the gate of the exercise yard
was open. It appeared to be about the same height, and was also spiked
at the top. The space between the walls was over twenty feet, and I had
reason to believe that there were no sentries there, except at the
gates. On the other hand, I knew that there was a line of soldiers
outside. Behold the little nut, my friends, which I had to open with no
crackers, save these two hands.

One thing upon which I relied was the height of my comrade Beaumont. I
have already said that he was a very tall man, six feet at least, and it
seemed to me that if I could mount upon his shoulders, and get my hands
upon the spikes, I could easily scale the wall. Could I pull my big
companion up after me? That was the question, for when I set forth with
a comrade, even though it be one for whom I bear no affection, nothing
on earth would make me abandon him. If I climbed the wall and he could
not follow me, I should be compelled to return to him. He did not seem
to concern himself much about it, however, so I hoped that he had
confidence in his own activity.

Then another very important matter was the choice of the sentry who
should be on duty in front of my window at the time of our attempt.
They were changed every two hours to insure their vigilance, but I, who
watched them closely each night out of my window, knew that there was a
great difference between them. There were some who were so keen that a
rat could not cross the yard unseen, while others thought only of their
own ease, and could sleep as soundly leaning upon a musket as if they
were at home upon a feather bed. There was one especially, a fat, heavy
man, who would retire into the shadow of the wall and doze so
comfortably during his two hours, that I have dropped pieces of plaster
from my window at his very feet, without his observing it. By good luck,
this fellow's watch was due from twelve to two upon the night which we
had fixed upon for our enterprise.

As the last day passed, I was so filled with nervous agitation that I
could not control myself, but ran ceaselessly about my cell, like a
mouse in a cage. Every moment I thought that the warder would detect the
looseness of the bar, or that the sentry would observe the unmortared
stone, which I could not conceal outside, as I did within. As for my
companion, he sat brooding upon the end of his bed, looking at me in a
sidelong fashion from time to time, and biting his nails like one who is
deep in thought.

'Courage, my friend!' I cried, slapping him upon the shoulder. 'You will
see your guns before another month be past.'

'That is very well,' said he. 'But whither will you fly when you get
free?'

'To the coast,' I answered. 'All comes right for a brave man, and I
shall make straight for my regiment.'

'You are more likely to make straight for the underground cells, or for
the Portsmouth hulks,' said he.

'A soldier takes his chances,' I remarked. 'It is only the poltroon who
reckons always upon the worst.'

I raised a flush in each of his sallow cheeks at that, and I was glad
of it, for it was the first sign of spirit which I had ever observed in
him. For a moment he put his hand out towards his water-jug, as though
he would have hurled it at me, but then he shrugged his shoulders and
sat in silence once more, biting his nails, and scowling down at the
floor. I could not but think, as I looked at him, that perhaps I was
doing the Flying Artillery a very bad service by bringing him back to
them.

I never in my life have known an evening pass as slowly as that one.
Towards nightfall a wind sprang up, and as the darkness deepened it blew
harder and harder, until a terrible gale was whistling over the moor. As
I looked out of my window I could not catch a glimpse of a star, and the
black clouds were flying low across the heavens. The rain was pouring
down, and what with its hissing and splashing, and the howling and
screaming of the wind, it was impossible for me to hear the steps of the
sentinels. 'If I cannot hear them,' thought I, 'then it is unlikely that
they can hear me'; and I waited with the utmost impatience until the
time when the inspector should have come round for his nightly peep
through our grating. Then having peered through the darkness, and seen
nothing of the sentry, who was doubtless crouching in some corner out of
the rain, I felt that the moment was come. I removed the bar, pulled out
the stone, and motioned to my companion to pass through.

'After you, Colonel,' said he.

'Will you not go first?' I asked.

'I had rather you showed me the way.'

'Come after me, then, but come silently, as you value your life.'

In the darkness I could hear the fellow's teeth chattering, and I
wondered whether a man ever had such a partner in a desperate
enterprise. I seized the bar, however, and mounting upon my stool, I
thrust my head and shoulders into the hole. I had wriggled through as
far as my waist, when my companion seized me suddenly by the knees, and
yelled at the top of his voice: 'Help! Help! A prisoner is escaping!'

Ah, my friends, what did I not feel at that moment! Of course, I saw in
an instant the game of this vile creature. Why should he risk his skin
in climbing walls when he might be sure of a free pardon from the
English for having prevented the escape of one so much more
distinguished than himself? I had recognized him as a poltroon and a
sneak, but I had not understood the depth of baseness to which he could
descend. One who has spent his life among gentlemen and men of honour
does not think of such things until they happen.

The blockhead did not seem to understand that he was lost more certainly
than I. I writhed back in the darkness, and seizing him by the throat, I
struck him twice with my iron bar. At the first blow he yelped as a
little cur does when you tread upon its paw. At the second, down he fell
with a groan upon the floor. Then I seated myself upon my bed, and
waited resignedly for whatever punishment my gaolers might inflict upon
me.

But a minute passed and yet another, with no sound save the heavy,
snoring breathing of the senseless wretch upon the floor. Was it
possible, then, that amid the fury of the storm his warning cries had
passed unheeded? At first it was but a tiny hope, another minute and it
was probable, another and it was certain. There was no sound in the
corridor, none in the courtyard. I wiped the cold sweat from my brow,
and asked myself what I should do next.

One thing seemed certain. The man on the floor must die. If I left him I
could not tell how short a time it might be before he gave the alarm. I
dare not strike a light, so I felt about in the darkness until my hand
came upon something wet, which I knew to be his head. I raised my iron
bar, but there was something, my friends, which prevented me from
bringing it down. In the heat of fight I have slain many men--men of
honour, too, who had done me no injury. Yet here was this wretch, a
creature too foul to live, who had tried to work me so great a mischief,
and yet I could not bring myself to crush his skull in. Such deeds are
very well for a Spanish partida--or for that matter a sansculotte of the
Faubourg St Antoine--but not for a soldier and a gentleman like me.

However, the heavy breathing of the fellow made me hope that it might be
a very long time before he recovered his senses. I gagged him,
therefore, and bound him with strips of blanket to the bed, so that in
his weakened condition there was good reason to think that, in any case,
he might not get free before the next visit of the warder. But now again
I was faced with new difficulties, for you will remember that I had
relied upon his height to help me over the walls. I could have sat down
and shed tears of despair had not the thought of my mother and of the
Emperor come to sustain me. 'Courage!' said I. 'If it were anyone but
Etienne Gerard he would be in a bad fix now; that is a young man who is
not so easily caught.'

I set to work therefore upon Beaumont's sheet as well as my own, and by
tearing them into strips and then plaiting them together, I made a very
excellent rope. This I tied securely to the centre of my iron bar, which
was a little over a foot in length. Then I slipped out into the yard,
where the rain was pouring and the wind screaming louder than ever. I
kept in the shadow of the prison wall, but it was as black as the ace of
spades, and I could not see my own hand in front of me. Unless I walked
into the sentinel I felt that I had nothing to fear from him. When I had
come under the wall I threw up my bar, and to my joy it stuck the very
first time between the spikes at the top. I climbed up my rope, pulled
it after me, and dropped down on the other side. Then I scaled the
second wall, and was sitting astride among the spikes upon the top, when
I saw something twinkle in the darkness beneath me. It was the bayonet
of the sentinel below, and so close was it (the second wall being rather
lower than the first) that I could easily, by leaning over, have
unscrewed it from its socket. There he was, humming a tune to himself,
and cuddling up against the wall to keep himself warm, little thinking
that a desperate man within a few feet of him was within an ace of
stabbing him to the heart with his own weapon. I was already bracing
myself for the spring when the fellow, with an oath, shouldered his
musket, and I heard his steps squelching through the mud as he resumed
his beat. I slipped down my rope, and, leaving it hanging, I ran at the
top of my speed across the moor.

Heavens, how I ran! The wind buffeted my face and buzzed in my nostrils.
The rain pringled upon my skin and hissed past my ears. I stumbled into
holes. I tripped over bushes. I fell among brambles. I was torn and
breathless and bleeding. My tongue was like leather, my feet like lead,
and my heart beating like a kettle-drum. Still I ran, and I ran, and I
ran.

But I had not lost my head, my friends. Everything was done with a
purpose. Our fugitives always made for the coast. I was determined to go
inland, and the more so as I had told Beaumont the opposite. I would fly
to the north, and they would seek me in the south. Perhaps you will ask
me how I could tell which was which on such a night. I answer that it
was by the wind. I had observed in the prison that it came from the
north, and so, as long as I kept my face to it, I was going in the right
direction.

Well, I was rushing along in this fashion when, suddenly, I saw two
yellow lights shining out of the darkness in front of me. I paused for a
moment, uncertain what I should do. I was still in my hussar uniform,
you understand, and it seemed to me that the very first thing that I
should aim at was to get some dress which should not betray me. If these
lights came from a cottage, it was probable enough that I might find
what I wanted there. I approached, therefore, feeling very sorry that I
had left my iron bar behind; for I was determined to fight to the death
before I should be retaken.

But very soon I found that there was no cottage there. The lights were
two lamps hung upon each side of a carriage, and by their glare I saw
that a broad road lay in front of me. Crouching among the bushes, I
observed that there were two horses to the equipage, that a small
post-boy was standing at their heads, and that one of the wheels was
lying in the road beside him. I can see them now, my friends: the
steaming creatures, the stunted lad with his hands to their bits, and
the big, black coach, all shining with the rain, and balanced upon its
three wheels. As I looked, the window was lowered, and a pretty little
face under a bonnet peeped out from it.

'What shall I do?' the lady cried to the post-boy, in a voice of
despair. 'Sir Charles is certainly lost, and I shall have to spend the
night upon the moor.'

'Perhaps I can be of some assistance to madame,' said I, scrambling out
from among the bushes into the glare of the lamps. A woman in distress
is a sacred thing to me, and this one was beautiful. You must not forget
that, although I was a colonel, I was only eight-and-twenty years of
age.

My word, how she screamed, and how the post-boy stared! You will
understand that after that long race in the darkness, with my shako
broken in, my face smeared with dirt, and my uniform all stained and
torn with brambles, I was not entirely the sort of gentleman whom one
would choose to meet in the middle of a lonely moor. Still, after the
first surprise, she soon understood that I was her very humble servant,
and I could even read in her pretty eyes that my manner and bearing had
not failed to produce an impression upon her.

'I am sorry to have startled you, madame,' said I. 'I chanced to
overhear your remark, and I could not refrain from offering you my
assistance.' I bowed as I spoke. You know my bow, and can realize what
its effect was upon the lady.

'I am much indebted to you, sir,' said she. 'We have had a terrible
journey since we left Tavistock. Finally, one of our wheels came off,
and here we are helpless in the middle of the moor. My husband, Sir
Charles, has gone on to get help, and I much fear that he must have lost
his way.'

I was about to attempt some consolation, when I saw beside the lady a
black travelling coat, faced with astrakhan, which her companion must
have left behind him. It was exactly what I needed to conceal my
uniform. It is true that I felt very much like a highway robber, but
then, what would you have? Necessity has no law, and I was in an enemy's
country.

'I presume, madame, that this is your husband's coat,' I remarked. 'You
will, I am sure, forgive me, if I am compelled to--' I pulled it through
the window as I spoke.

I could not bear to see the look of surprise and fear and disgust which
came over her face.

'Oh, I have been mistaken in you!' she cried. 'You came to rob me, then,
and not to help me. You have the bearing of a gentleman, and yet you
steal my husband's coat.'

'Madame,' said I, 'I beg that you will not condemn me until you know
everything. It is quite necessary that I should take this coat, but if
you will have the goodness to tell me who it is who is fortunate enough
to be your husband, I shall see that the coat is sent back to him.'

Her face softened a little, though she still tried to look severe. 'My
husband,' she answered, 'is Sir Charles Meredith, and he is travelling
to Dartmoor Prison, upon important Government business. I only ask you,
sir, to go upon your way, and to take nothing which belongs to him.'

'There is only one thing which belongs to him that I covet,' said I.

'And you have taken it from the carriage,' she cried.

'No,' I answered. 'It still remains there.'

She laughed in her frank English way.

'If, instead of paying me compliments, you were to return my husband's
coat--' she began.

'Madame,' I answered, 'what you ask is quite impossible. If you will
allow me to come into the carriage, I will explain to you how necessary
this coat is to me.'

Heaven knows into what foolishness I might have plunged myself had we
not, at this instant, heard a faint halloa in the distance, which was
answered by a shout from the little post-boy. In the rain and the
darkness, I saw a lantern some distance from us, but approaching
rapidly.

'I am sorry, madame, that I am forced to leave you,' said I. 'You can
assure your husband that I shall take every care of his coat.' Hurried
as I was, I ventured to pause a moment to salute the lady's hand, which
she snatched through the window with an admirable pretence of being
offended at my presumption. Then, as the lantern was quite close to me,
and the post-boy seemed inclined to interfere with my flight, I tucked
my precious overcoat under my arm, and dashed off into the darkness.

And now I set myself to the task of putting as broad a stretch of moor
between the prison and myself as the remaining hours of darkness would
allow. Setting my face to the wind once more, I ran until I fell from
exhaustion. Then, after five minutes of panting among the heather, I
made another start, until again my knees gave way beneath me. I was
young and hard, with muscles of steel, and a frame which had been
toughened by twelve years of camp and field. Thus I was able to keep up
this wild flight for another three hours, during which I still guided
myself, you understand, by keeping the wind in my face. At the end of
that time I calculated that I had put nearly twenty miles between the
prison and myself. Day was about to break, so I crouched down among the
heather upon the top of one of those small hills which abound in that
country, with the intention of hiding myself until nightfall. It was no
new thing for me to sleep in the wind and the rain, so, wrapping myself
up in my thick warm cloak, I soon sank into a doze.

But it was not a refreshing slumber. I tossed and tumbled amid a series
of vile dreams, in which everything seemed to go wrong with me. At last,
I remember, I was charging an unshaken square of Hungarian Grenadiers,
with a single squadron upon spent horses, just as I did at Elchingen. I
stood in my stirrups to shout 'Vive l'Empereur!' and as I did so, there
came the answering roar from my hussars, 'Vive l'Empereur!' I sprang
from my rough bed, with the words still ringing in my ears, and then, as
I rubbed my eyes, and wondered if I were mad, the same cry came again,
five thousand voices in one long-drawn yell. I looked out from my screen
of brambles, and saw in the clear light of morning the very last thing
that I should either have expected or chosen.

It was Dartmoor Prison! There it stretched, grim and hideous, within a
furlong of me. Had I run on for a few more minutes in the dark, I should
have butted my shako against the wall. I was so taken aback at the
sight, that I could scarcely realize what had happened. Then it all
became clear to me, and I struck my head with my hands in my despair.
The wind had veered from north to south during the night, and I, keeping
my face always towards it, had run ten miles out and ten miles in,
winding up where I had started. When I thought of my hurry, my falls, my
mad rushing and jumping, all ending in this, it seemed so absurd, that
my grief changed suddenly to amusement, and I fell among the brambles,
and laughed, and laughed, until my sides were sore. Then I rolled myself
up in my cloak and considered seriously what I should do.

One lesson which I have learned in my roaming life, my friends, is
never to call anything a misfortune until you have seen the end of it.
Is not every hour a fresh point of view? In this case I soon perceived
that accident had done for me as much as the most profound cunning. My
guards naturally commenced their search from the place where I had taken
Sir Charles Meredith's coat, and from my hiding-place I could see them
hurrying along the road to that point. Not one of them ever dreamed that
I could have doubled back from there, and I lay quite undisturbed in the
little bush-covered cup at the summit of my knoll. The prisoners had, of
course, learned of my escape, and all day exultant yells, like that
which had aroused me in the morning, resounded over the moor, bearing a
welcome message of sympathy and companionship to my ears. How little did
they dream that on the top of that very mound, which they could see from
their windows, was lying the comrade whose escape they were celebrating?
As for me--I could look down upon this poor herd of idle warriors, as
they paced about the great exercise yard, or gathered in little groups,
gesticulating joyfully over my success. Once I heard a howl of
execration, and I saw Beaumont, his head all covered with bandages,
being led across the yard by two of the warders. I cannot tell you the
pleasure which this sight gave me, for it proved that I had not killed
him, and also that the others knew the true story of what had passed.
They had all known me too well to think that I could have abandoned him.

All that long day I lay behind my screen of bushes, listening to the
bells which struck the hours below.

My pockets were filled with bread which I had saved out of my allowance,
and on searching my borrowed overcoat I came upon a silver flask, full
of excellent brandy and water, so that I was able to get through the day
without hardship. The only other things in the pockets were a red silk
handkerchief, a tortoise-shell snuff-box, and a blue envelope, with a
red seal, addressed to the Governor of Dartmoor Prison. As to the first
two, I determined to send them back when I should return the coat
itself.

The letter caused me more perplexity, for the Governor had always shown
me every courtesy, and it offended my sense of honour that I should
interfere with his correspondence. I had almost made up my mind to leave
it under a stone upon the roadway within musket-shot of the gate. This
would guide them in their search for me, however, and so, on the whole,
I saw no better way than just to carry the letter with me in the hope
that I might find some means of sending it back to him. Meanwhile I
packed it safely away in my inner-most pocket.

There was a warm sun to dry my clothes, and when night fell I was ready
for my journey. I promise you that there were no mistakes this time. I
took the stars for my guides, as every hussar should be taught to do,
and I put eight good leagues between myself and the prison. My plan now
was to obtain a complete suit of clothes from the first person whom I
could waylay, and I should then find my way to the north coast, where
there were many smugglers and fishermen who would be ready to earn the
reward which was paid by the Emperor to those who brought escaping
prisoners across the Channel. I had taken the panache from my shako so
that it might escape notice, but even with my fine overcoat I feared
that sooner or later my uniform would betray me. My first care must be
to provide myself with a complete disguise.

When day broke, I saw a river upon my right and a small town upon my
left--the blue smoke reeking up above the moor. I should have liked well
to have entered it, because it would have interested me to see something
of the customs of the English, which differ very much from those of
other nations. Much as I should have wished, however, to have seen them
eat their raw meat and sell their wives, it would have been dangerous
until I had got rid of my uniform. My cap, my moustache, and my speech
would all help to betray me. I continued to travel towards the north
therefore, looking about me continually, but never catching a glimpse of
my pursuers.

About midday I came to where, in a secluded valley, there stood a single
small cottage without any other building in sight. It was a neat little
house, with a rustic porch and a small garden in front of it, with a
swarm of cocks and hens. I lay down among the ferns and watched it, for
it seemed to be exactly the kind of place where I might obtain what I
wanted. My bread was finished, and I was exceedingly hungry after my
long journey; I determined, therefore, to make a short reconnaissance,
and then to march up to this cottage, summon it to surrender, and help
myself to all that I needed. It could at least provide me with a chicken
and with an omelette. My mouth watered at the thought.

As I lay there, wondering who could live in this lonely place, a brisk
little fellow came out through the porch, accompanied by another older
man, who carried two large clubs in his hands. These he handed to his
young companion, who swung them up and down, and round and round, with
extraordinary swiftness. The other, standing beside him, appeared to
watch him with great attention, and occasionally to advise him. Finally
he took a rope, and began skipping like a girl, the other still gravely
observing him. As you may think, I was utterly puzzled as to what these
people could be, and could only surmise that the one was a doctor, and
the other a patient who had submitted himself to some singular method of
treatment.

Well, as I lay watching and wondering, the older man brought out a
great-coat, and held it while the other put it on and buttoned it to his
chin. The day was a warmish one, so that this proceeding amazed me even
more than the other. 'At least,' thought I, 'it is evident that his
exercise is over'; but, far from this being so, the man began to run, in
spite of his heavy coat, and as it chanced, he came right over the moor
in my direction. His companion had re-entered the house, so that this
arrangement suited me admirably. I would take the small man's clothing,
and hurry on to some village where I could buy provisions. The chickens
were certainly tempting, but still there were at least two men in the
house, so perhaps it would be wiser for me, since I had no arms, to keep
away from it.

I lay quietly then among the ferns. Presently I heard the steps of the
runner, and there he was quite close to me, with his huge coat, and the
perspiration running down his face. He seemed to be a very solid
man--but small--so small that I feared that his clothes might be of
little use to me. When I jumped out upon him he stopped running, and
looked at me in the greatest astonishment.

'Blow my dickey,' said he, 'give it a name, guv'nor! Is it a circus, or
what?'

That was how he talked, though I cannot pretend to tell you what he
meant by it.

'You will excuse me, sir,' said I, 'but I am under the necessity of
asking you to give me your clothes.'

'Give you what?' he cried.

'Your clothes.'

'Well, if this don't lick cock-fighting!' said he. 'What am I to give
you my clothes for?'

'Because I need them.'

'And suppose I won't?'

'Be jabers,' said I, 'I shall have no choice but to take them.'

He stood with his hands in the pockets of his great-coat, and a most
amused smile upon his square-jawed, clean-shaven face.

'You'll take them, will you?' said he. 'You're a very leery cove, by the
look of you, but I can tell you that you've got the wrong sow by the ear
this time. I know who you are. You're a runaway Frenchy, from the prison
yonder, as anyone could tell with half an eye. But you don't know who I
am, else you wouldn't try such a plant as that. Why, man, I'm the
Bristol Bustler, nine stone champion, and them's my training quarters
down yonder.'

He stared at me as if this announcement of his would have crushed me to
the earth, but I smiled at him in my turn, and looked him up and down,
with a twirl of my moustache.

'You may be a very brave man, sir,' said I, 'but when I tell you that
you are opposed to Colonel Etienne Gerard, of the Hussars of Conflans,
you will see the necessity of giving up your clothes without further
parley.'

'Look here, mounseer, drop it!' he cried; 'this'll end by your getting
pepper.'

'Your clothes, sir, this instant!' I shouted, advancing fiercely upon
him.

For answer he threw off his heavy great-coat, and stood in a singular
attitude, with one arm out, and the other across his chest, looking at
me with a curious smile. For myself, I knew nothing of the methods of
fighting which these people have, but on horse or on foot, with arms or
without them, I am always ready to take my own part. You understand that
a soldier cannot always choose his own methods, and that it is time to
howl when you are living among wolves. I rushed at him, therefore, with
a warlike shout, and kicked him with both my feet. At the same moment my
heels flew into the air, I saw as many flashes as at Austerlitz, and the
back of my head came down with a crash upon a stone. After that I can
remember nothing more.

When I came to myself I was lying upon a truckle-bed, in a bare,
half-furnished room. My head was ringing like a bell, and when I put up
my hand, there was a lump like a walnut over one of my eyes. My nose was
full of a pungent smell, and I soon found that a strip of paper soaked
in vinegar was fastened across my brow. At the other end of the room
this terrible little man was sitting with his knee bare, and his
elderly companion was rubbing it with some liniment. The latter seemed
to be in the worst of tempers, and he kept up a continual scolding,
which the other listened to with a gloomy face.

'Never heard tell of such a thing in my life,' he was saying. 'In
training for a month with all the weight of it on my shoulders, and then
when I get you as fit as a trout, and within two days of fighting the
likeliest man on the list, you let yourself into a by-battle with a
foreigner.'

'There, there! Stow your gab!' said the other, sulkily. 'You're a very
good trainer, Jim, but you'd be better with less jaw.'

'I should think it was time to jaw,' the elderly man answered. 'If this
knee don't get well before next Wednesday, they'll have it that you
fought a cross, and a pretty job you'll have next time you look for a
backer.'

'Fought a cross!' growled the other. 'I've won nineteen battles, and no
man ever so much as dared to say the word "cross" in my hearin'. How the
deuce was I to get out of it when the cove wanted the very clothes off
my back?'

'Tut, man; you knew that the beak and the guards were within a mile of
you. You could have set them on to him as well then as now. You'd have
got your clothes back again all right.'

'Well, strike me!' said the Bustler. 'I don't often break my trainin',
but when it comes to givin' up my clothes to a Frenchy who couldn't hit
a dint in a pat o' butter, why, it's more than I can swaller.'

'Pooh, man, what are the clothes worth? D'you know that Lord Rufton
alone has five thousand pounds on you? When you jump the ropes on
Wednesday, you'll carry every penny of fifty thousand into the ring. A
pretty thing to turn up with a swollen knee and a story about a
Frenchman!'

'I never thought he'd ha' kicked,' said the Bustler.

'I suppose you expected he'd fight Broughton's rules, and strict P.R.?
Why, you silly, they don't know what fighting is in France.'

'My friends,' said I, sitting up on my bed, 'I do not understand very
much of what you say, but when you speak like that it is foolishness. We
know so much about fighting in France, that we have paid our little
visit to nearly every capital in Europe, and very soon we are coming to
London. But we fight like soldiers, you understand, and not like gamins
in the gutter. You strike me on the head. I kick you on the knee. It is
child's play. But if you will give me a sword, and take another one, I
will show you how we fight over the water.'

They both stared at me in their solid, English way.

'Well, I'm glad you're not dead, mounseer,' said the elder one at last.
'There wasn't much sign of life in you when the Bustler and me carried
you down. That head of yours ain't thick enough to stop the crook of the
hardest hitter in Bristol.'

'He's a game cove, too, and he came for me like a bantam,' said the
other, still rubbing his knee. 'I got my old left-right in, and he went
over as if he had been pole-axed. It wasn't my fault, mounseer. I told
you you'd get pepper if you went on.'

'Well, it's something to say all your life, that you've been handled by
the finest light-weight in England,' said the older man, looking at me
with an expression of congratulation upon his face. 'You've had him at
his best, too--in the pink of condition, and trained by Jim Hunter.'

'I am used to hard knocks,' said I, unbuttoning my tunic, and showing my
two musket wounds. Then I bared my ankle also, and showed the place in
my eye where the guerilla had stabbed me.

'He can take his gruel,' said the Bustler.

'What a glutton he'd have made for the middle-weights,' remarked the
trainer; 'with six months' coaching he'd astonish the fancy. It's a pity
he's got to go back to prison.'

I did not like that last remark at all. I buttoned up my coat and rose
from the bed.

'I must ask you to let me continue my journey,' said I.

'There's no help for it, mounseer,' the trainer answered. 'It's a hard
thing to send such a man as you back to such a place, but business is
business, and there's a twenty pound reward. They were here this
morning, looking for you, and I expect they'll be round again.'

His words turned my heart to lead.

'Surely, you would not betray me!' I cried. 'I will send you twice
twenty pounds on the day that I set foot upon France. I swear it upon
the honour of a French gentleman.'

But I only got head-shakes for a reply. I pleaded, I argued, I spoke of
the English hospitality and the fellowship of brave men, but I might as
well have been addressing the two great wooden clubs which stood
balanced upon the floor in front of me. There was no sign of sympathy
upon their bull-faces.

'Business is business, mounseer,' the old trainer repeated. 'Besides,
how am I to put the Bustler into the ring on Wednesday if he's jugged by
the beak for aidin' and abettin' a prisoner of war? I've got to look
after the Bustler, and I take no risks.'

This, then, was the end of all my struggles and strivings. I was to be
led back again like a poor silly sheep who has broken through the
hurdles. They little knew me who could fancy that I should submit to
such a fate. I had heard enough to tell me where the weak point of these
two men was, and I showed, as I have often showed before, that Etienne
Gerard is never so terrible as when all hope seems to have deserted him.
With a single spring I seized one of the clubs and swung it over the
head of the Bustler.

'Come what may,' I cried, '_you_ shall be spoiled for Wednesday.'

The fellow growled out an oath, and would have sprung at me, but the
other flung his arms round him and pinned him to the chair.

'Not if I know it, Bustler,' he screamed. 'None of your games while I am
by. Get away out of this, Frenchy. We only want to see your back. Run
away, run away, or he'll get loose!'

It was good advice, I thought, and I ran to the door, but as I came out
into the open air my head swam round and I had to lean against the porch
to save myself from falling. Consider all that I had been through, the
anxiety of my escape, the long, useless flight in the storm, the day
spent amid wet ferns, with only bread for food, the second journey by
night, and now the injuries which I had received in attempting to
deprive the little man of his clothes. Was it wonderful that even I
should reach the limits of my endurance?

I stood there in my heavy coat and my poor battered shako, my chin upon
my chest, and my eyelids over my eyes. I had done my best, and I could
do no more. It was the sound of horses' hoofs which made me at last
raise my head, and there was the grey-moustached Governor of Dartmoor
Prison not ten paces in front of me, with six mounted warders behind
him!

'So, Colonel,' said he, with a bitter smile, 'we have found you once
more.'

When a brave man has done his utmost, and has failed, he shows his
breeding by the manner in which he accepts his defeat. For me, I took
the letter which I had in my pocket, and stepping forward, I handed it
with such grace of manner as I could summon to the Governor.

'It has been my misfortune, sir, to detain one of your letters,' said I.

He looked at me in amazement, and beckoned to the warders to arrest me.
Then he broke the seal of the letter. I saw a curious expression come
over his face as he read it.

'This must be the letter which Sir Charles Meredith lost,' said he.

'It was in the pocket of his coat.'

'You have carried it for two days?'

'Since the night before last.'

'And never looked at the contents?'

I showed him by my manner that he had committed an indiscretion in
asking a question which one gentleman should not have put to another.

To my surprise he burst out into a roar of laughter.

'Colonel,' said he, wiping the tears from his eyes, 'you have really
given both yourself and us a great deal of unnecessary trouble. Allow me
to read the letter which you carried with you in your flight.'

And this was what I heard:--

'On receipt of this you are directed to release Colonel Etienne Gerard,
of the 3rd Hussars, who has been exchanged against Colonel Mason, of the
Horse Artillery, now in Verdun.'

And as he read it, he laughed again, and the warders laughed, and the
two men from the cottage laughed, and then, as I heard this universal
merriment, and thought of all my hopes and fears, and my struggles and
dangers, what could a debonair soldier do but lean against the porch
once more, and laugh as heartily as any of them? And of them all was it
not I who had the best reason to laugh, since in front of me I could see
my dear France, and my mother, and the Emperor, and my horsemen; while
behind lay the gloomy prison, and the heavy hand of the English King?




5. HOW THE BRIGADIER TOOK THE FIELD AGAINST THE MARSHAL MILLEFLEURS


Massena was a thin, sour little fellow, and after his hunting accident
he had only one eye, but when it looked out from under his cocked hat
there was not much upon a field of battle which escaped it. He could
stand in front of a battalion, and with a single sweep tell you if a
buckle or a gaiter button were out of place. Neither the officers nor
the men were very fond of him, for he was, as you know, a miser, and
soldiers love that their leaders should be free-handed. At the same
time, when it came to work they had a very high respect for him, and
they would rather fight under him than under anyone except the Emperor
himself, and Lannes, when he was alive. After all, if he had a tight
grasp upon his money-bags, there was a day also, you must remember, when
that same grip was upon Zurich and Genoa. He clutched on to his
positions as he did to his strong box, and it took a very clever man to
loosen him from either.

When I received his summons I went gladly to his headquarters, for I was
always a great favourite of his, and there was no officer of whom he
thought more highly. That was the best of serving with those good old
generals, that they knew enough to be able to pick out a fine soldier
when they saw one. He was seated alone in his tent, with his chin upon
his hand, and his brow as wrinkled as if he had been asked for a
subscription. He smiled, however, when he saw me before him.

'Good day, Colonel Gerard.'

'Good day, Marshal.'

'How is the Third of Hussars?'

'Seven hundred incomparable men upon seven hundred excellent horses.'

'And your wounds--are they healed?'

'My wounds never heal, Marshal,' I answered.

'And why?'

'Because I have always new ones.'

'General Rapp must look to his laurels,' said he, his face all breaking
into wrinkles as he laughed. 'He has had twenty-one from the enemy's
bullets, and as many from Larrey's knives and probes. Knowing that you
were hurt, Colonel, I have spared you of late.'

'Which hurt me most of all.'

'Tut, tut! Since the English got behind these accursed lines of Torres
Vedras, there has been little for us to do. You did not miss much during
your imprisonment at Dartmoor. But now we are on the eve of action.'

'We advance?'

'No, retire.'

My face must have shown my dismay. What, retire before this sacred dog
of a Wellington--he who had listened unmoved to my words, and had sent
me to his land of fogs? I could have sobbed as I thought of it.

'What would you have?' cried Massena impatiently. 'When one is in check,
it is necessary to move the king.'

'Forwards,' I suggested.

He shook his grizzled head.

'The lines are not to be forced,' said he. 'I have already lost General
St. Croix and more men than I can replace. On the other hand, we have
been here at Santarem for nearly six months. There is not a pound of
flour nor a jug of wine on the countryside. We must retire.'

'There are flour and wine in Lisbon,' I persisted.

'Tut, you speak as if an army could charge in and charge out again like
your regiment of hussars. If Soult were here with thirty thousand
men--but he will not come. I sent for you, however, Colonel Gerard, to
say that I have a very singular and important expedition which I intend
to place under your direction.'

I pricked up my ears, as you can imagine. The Marshal unrolled a great
map of the country and spread it upon the table. He flattened it out
with his little, hairy hands.

'This is Santarem,' he said pointing.

I nodded.

'And here, twenty-five miles to the east, is Almeixal, celebrated for
its vintages and for its enormous Abbey.'

Again I nodded; I could not think what was coming.

'Have you heard of the Marshal Millefleurs?' asked Massena.

'I have served with all the Marshals,' said I, 'but there is none of
that name.'

'It is but the nickname which the soldiers have given him,' said
Massena. 'If you had not been away from us for some months, it would not
be necessary for me to tell you about him. He is an Englishman, and a
man of good breeding. It is on account of his manners that they have
given him his title. I wish you to go to this polite Englishman at
Almeixal.'

'Yes, Marshal.'

'And to hang him to the nearest tree.'

'Certainly, Marshal.'

I turned briskly upon my heels, but Massena recalled me before I could
reach the opening of his tent.

'One moment, Colonel,' said he; 'you had best learn how matters stand
before you start. You must know, then, that this Marshal Millefleurs,
whose real name is Alexis Morgan, is a man of very great ingenuity and
bravery. He was an officer in the English Guards, but having been broken
for cheating at cards, he left the army. In some manner he gathered a
number of English deserters round him and took to the mountains. French
stragglers and Portuguese brigands joined him, and he found himself at
the head of five hundred men. With these he took possession of the
Abbey of Almeixal, sent the monks about their business, fortified the
place, and gathered in the plunder of all the country round.'

'For which it is high time he was hanged,' said I, making once more for
the door.

'One instant!' cried the Marshal, smiling at my impatience. 'The worst
remains behind. Only last week the Dowager Countess of La Ronda, the
richest woman in Spain, was taken by these ruffians in the passes as she
was journeying from King Joseph's Court to visit her grandson. She is
now a prisoner in the Abbey, and is only protected by her----'

'Grandmotherhood,' I suggested.

'Her power of paying a ransom,' said Massena. 'You have three missions,
then: To rescue this unfortunate lady; to punish this villain; and, if
possible, to break up this nest of brigands. It will be a proof of the
confidence which I have in you when I say that I can only spare you half
a squadron with which to accomplish all this.'

My word, I could hardly believe my ears! I thought that I should have
had my regiment at the least.

'I would give you more,' said he, 'but I commence my retreat today, and
Wellington is so strong in horse that every trooper becomes of
importance. I cannot spare you another man. You will see what you can
do, and you will report yourself to me at Abrantes not later than
tomorrow night.'

It was very complimentary that he should rate my powers so high, but it
was also a little embarrassing. I was to rescue an old lady, to hang an
Englishman, and to break up a band of five hundred assassins--all with
fifty men. But after all, the fifty men were Hussars of Conflans, and
they had an Etienne Gerard to lead them. As I came out into the warm
Portuguese sunshine my confidence had returned to me, and I had already
begun to wonder whether the medal which I had so often deserved might
not be waiting for me at Almeixal.

You may be sure that I did not take my fifty men at hap-hazard. They
were all old soldiers of the German wars, some of them with three
stripes, and most of them with two. Oudet and Papilette, two of the best
sub-officers in the regiment, were at their head. When I had them formed
up in fours, all in silver grey and upon chestnut horses, with their
leopard skin shabracks and their little red panaches, my heart beat high
at the sight. I could not look at their weather-stained faces, with the
great moustaches which bristled over their chin-straps, without feeling
a glow of confidence, and, between ourselves, I have no doubt that that
was exactly how they felt when they saw their young Colonel on his great
black war-horse riding at their head.

Well, when we got free of the camp and over the Tagus, I threw out my
advance and my flankers, keeping my own place at the head of the main
body. Looking back from the hills above Santarem, we could see the dark
lines of Massena's army, with the flash and twinkle of the sabres and
bayonets as he moved his regiments into position for their retreat. To
the south lay the scattered red patches of the English outposts, and
behind the grey smoke-cloud which rose from Wellington's camp--thick,
oily smoke, which seemed to our poor starving fellows to bear with it
the rich smell of seething camp-kettles. Away to the west lay a curve of
blue sea flecked with the white sails of the English ships.

You will understand that as we were riding to the east, our road lay
away from both armies. Our own marauders, however, and the scouting
parties of the English, covered the country, and it was necessary with
my small troop that I should take every precaution. During the whole day
we rode over desolate hill-sides, the lower portions covered by the
budding vines, but the upper turning from green to grey, and jagged
along the skyline like the back of a starved horse. Mountain streams
crossed our path, running west to the Tagus, and once we came to a deep,
strong river, which might have checked us had I not found the ford by
observing where houses had been built opposite each other upon either
bank. Between them, as every scout should know, you will find your ford.
There was none to give us information, for neither man nor beast, nor
any living thing except great clouds of crows, was to be seen during our
journey.

The sun was beginning to sink when we came to a valley clear in the
centre, but shrouded by huge oak trees upon either side. We could not be
more than a few miles from Almeixal, so it seemed to me to be best to
keep among the groves, for the spring had been an early one and the
leaves were already thick enough to conceal us. We were riding then in
open order among the great trunks, when one of my flankers came
galloping up.

'There are English across the valley, Colonel,' he cried, as he saluted.

'Cavalry or infantry?'

'Dragoons, Colonel,' said he; 'I saw the gleam of their helmets, and
heard the neigh of a horse.'

Halting my men I hastened to the edge of the wood. There could be no
doubt about it. A party of English cavalry was travelling in a line with
us, and in the same direction. I caught a glimpse of their red coats and
of their flashing arms glowing and twinkling among the tree-trunks.
Once, as they passed through a small clearing, I could see their whole
force, and I judged that they were of about the same strength as my
own--a half squadron at the most.

You who have heard some of my little adventures will give me credit for
being quick in my decisions, and prompt in carrying them out. But here I
must confess that I was in two minds. On the one hand there was the
chance of a fine cavalry skirmish with the English. On the other hand,
there was my mission at the Abbey of Almeixal, which seemed already to
be so much above my power. If I were to lose any of my men, it was
certain that I should be unable to carry out my orders. I was sitting
my horse, with my chin in my gauntlet, looking across at the rippling
gleams of light from the further wood, when suddenly one of these
red-coated Englishmen rode out from the cover, pointing at me and
breaking into a shrill whoop and halloa as if I had been a fox. Three
others joined him, and one who was a bugler sounded a call, which
brought the whole of them into the open. They were, as I had thought, a
half squadron, and they formed a double line with a front of
twenty-five, their officer--the one who had whooped at me--at their
head.

For my own part, I had instantly brought my own troopers into the same
formation, so that there we were, hussars and dragoons, with only two
hundred yards of grassy sward between us. They carried themselves well,
those red-coated troopers, with their silver helmets, their high white
plumes, and their long, gleaming swords; while, on the other hand, I am
sure that they would acknowledge that they had never looked upon finer
light horsemen than the fifty hussars of Conflans who were facing them.
They were heavier, it is true, and they may have seemed the smarter, for
Wellington used to make them burnish their metal work, which was not
usual among us. On the other hand, it is well known that the English
tunics were too tight for the sword-arm, which gave our men an
advantage. As to bravery, foolish, inexperienced people of every nation
always think that their own soldiers are braver than any others. There
is no nation in the world which does not entertain this idea. But when
one has seen as much as I have done, one understands that there is no
very marked difference, and that although nations differ very much in
discipline, they are all equally brave--except that the French have
rather more courage than the rest.

Well, the cork was drawn and the glasses ready, when suddenly the
English officer raised his sword to me as if in a challenge, and
cantered his horse across the grassland. My word, there is no finer
sight upon earth than that of a gallant man upon a gallant steed! I
could have halted there just to watch him as he came with such careless
grace, his sabre down by his horse's shoulder, his head thrown back, his
white plume tossing--youth and strength and courage, with the violet
evening sky above and the oak trees behind. But it was not for me to
stand and stare. Etienne Gerard may have his faults, but, my faith, he
was never accused of being backward in taking his own part. The old
horse, Rataplan, knew me so well that he had started off before ever I
gave the first shake to the bridle.

There are two things in this world that I am very slow to forget: the
face of a pretty woman, and the legs of a fine horse. Well, as we drew
together, I kept on saying, 'Where have I seen those great roan
shoulders? Where have I seen that dainty fetlock?' Then suddenly I
remembered, and as I looked up at the reckless eyes and the challenging
smile, whom should I recognize but the man who had saved me from the
brigands and played me for my freedom--he whose correct title was Milor
the Hon. Sir Russell Bart!

'Bart!' I shouted.

He had his arm raised for a cut, and three parts of his body open to my
point, for he did not know very much about the use of the sword. As I
brought my hilt to the salute he dropped his hand and stared at me.

'Halloa!' said he. 'It's Gerard!' You would have thought by his manner
that I had met him by appointment. For my own part, I would have
embraced him had he but come an inch of the way to meet me.

'I thought we were in for some sport,' said he. 'I never dreamed that it
was you.'

I found this tone of disappointment somewhat irritating. Instead of
being glad at having met a friend, he was sorry at having missed an
enemy.

'I should have been happy to join in your sport, my dear Bart,' said I.
'But I really cannot turn my sword upon a man who saved my life.'

'Tut, never mind about that.'

'No, it is impossible. I should never forgive myself.'

'You make too much of a trifle.'

'My mother's one desire is to embrace you. If ever you should be in
Gascony----'

'Lord Wellington is coming there with 60,000 men.'

'Then one of them will have a chance of surviving,' said I, laughing.
'In the meantime, put your sword in your sheath!'

Our horses were standing head to tail, and the Bart put out his hand and
patted me on the thigh.

'You're a good chap, Gerard,' said he. 'I only wish you had been born on
the right side of the Channel.'

'I was,' said I.

'Poor devil!' he cried, with such an earnestness of pity that he set me
laughing again. 'But look here, Gerard,' he continued; 'this is all very
well, but it is not business, you know. I don't know what Massena would
say to it, but our Chief would jump out of his riding-boots if he saw
us. We weren't sent out here for a picnic--either of us.'

'What would you have?'

'Well, we had a little argument about our hussars and dragoons, if you
remember. I've got fifty of the Sixteenth all chewing their carbine
bullets behind me. You've got as many fine-looking boys over yonder, who
seem to be fidgeting in their saddles. If you and I took the right
flanks we should not spoil each other's beauty--though a little
blood-letting is a friendly thing in this climate.'

There seemed to me to be a good deal of sense in what he said. For the
moment Mr Alexis Morgan and the Countess of La Ronda and the Abbey of
Almeixal went right out of my head, and I could only think of the fine
level turf and of the beautiful skirmish which we might have.

'Very good, Bart,' said I. 'We have seen the front of your dragoons. We
shall now have a look at their backs.'

'Any betting?' he asked.

'The stake,' said I, 'is nothing less than the honour of the Hussars of
Conflans.'

'Well, come on!' he answered. 'If we break you, well and good--if you
break us, it will be all the better for Marshal Millefleurs.'

When he said that I could only stare at him in astonishment.

'Why for Marshal Millefleurs?' I asked.

'It is the name of a rascal who lives out this way. My dragoons have
been sent by Lord Wellington to see him safely hanged.'

'Name of a name!' I cried. 'Why, my hussars have been sent by Massena
for that very object.'

We burst out laughing at that, and sheathed our swords. There was a
whirr of steel from behind us as our troopers followed our example.

'We are allies!' he cried.

'For a day.'

'We must join forces.'

'There is no doubt of it.'

And so, instead of fighting, we wheeled our half squadrons round and
moved in two little columns down the valley, the shakos and the helmets
turned inwards, and the men looking their neighbours up and down, like
old fighting dogs with tattered ears who have learned to respect each
other's teeth. The most were on the broad grin, but there were some on
either side who looked black and challenging, especially the English
sergeant and my own sub-officer Papilette. They were men of habit, you
see, who could not change all their ways of thinking in a moment.
Besides, Papilette had lost his only brother at Busaco. As for the Bart
and me, we rode together at the head and chatted about all that had
occurred to us since that famous game of écarté of which I have told
you.

For my own part, I spoke to him of my adventures in England. They are a
very singular people, these English. Although he knew that I had been
engaged in twelve campaigns, yet I am sure that the Bart thought more
highly of me because I had had an affair with the Bristol Bustler. He
told me, too, that the Colonel who presided over his court-martial for
playing cards with a prisoner acquitted him of neglect of duty, but
nearly broke him because he thought that he had not cleared his trumps
before leading his suit. Yes, indeed, they are a singular people.

At the end of the valley the road curved over some rising ground before
winding down into another wider valley beyond. We called a halt when we
came to the top; for there, right in front of us, at the distance of
about three miles, was a scattered, grey town, with a single enormous
building upon the flank of the mountain which overlooked it. We could
not doubt that we were at last in sight of the Abbey that held the gang
of rascals whom we had come to disperse. It was only now, I think, that
we fully understood what a task lay in front of us, for the place was a
veritable fortress, and it was evident that cavalry should never have
been sent out upon such an errand.

'That's got nothing to do with us,' said the Bart; Wellington and
Massena can settle that between them.'

'Courage!' I answered. 'Piré took Leipzig with fifty hussars.'

'Had they been dragoons,' said the Bart, laughing, 'he would have had
Berlin. But you are senior officer; give us a lead, and we'll see who
will be the first to flinch.'

'Well,' said I, 'whatever we do must be done at once, for my orders are
to be on my way to Abrantes by tomorrow night. But we must have some
information first, and here is someone who should be able to give it to
us.'

There was a square, whitewashed house standing by the roadside, which
appeared, from the bush hanging over the door, to be one of those
wayside tabernas which are provided for the muleteers. A lantern was
hung in the porch, and by its light we saw two men, the one in the brown
habit of a Capuchin monk, and the other girt with an apron, which showed
him to be the landlord. They were conversing together so earnestly that
we were upon them before they were aware of us. The innkeeper turned to
fly, but one of the Englishmen seized him by the hair, and held him
tight.

'For mercy's sake, spare me,' he yelled. 'My house has been gutted by
the French and harried by the English, and my feet have been burned by
the brigands. I swear by the Virgin that I have neither money nor food
in my inn, and the good Father Abbot, who is starving upon my doorstep,
will be witness to it.'

'Indeed, sir,' said the Capuchin, in excellent French, 'what this worthy
man says is very true. He is one of the many victims to these cruel
wars, although his loss is but a feather-weight compared to mine. Let
him go,' he added, in English, to the trooper, 'he is too weak to fly,
even if he desired to.'

In the light of the lantern I saw that this monk was a magnificent man,
dark and bearded, with the eyes of a hawk, and so tall that his cowl
came up to Rataplan's ears. He wore the look of one who had been through
much suffering, but he carried himself like a king, and we could form
some opinion of his learning when we each heard him talk our own
language as fluently as if he were born to it.

'You have nothing to fear,' said I, to the trembling innkeeper. 'As to
you, father, you are, if I am not mistaken, the very man who can give us
the information which we require.'

'All that I have is at your service, my son. But,' he added, with a wan
smile, 'my Lenten fare is always somewhat meagre, and this year it has
been such that I must ask you for a crust of bread if I am to have the
strength to answer your questions.'

We bore two days' rations in our haversacks, so that he soon had the
little he asked for. It was dreadful to see the wolfish way in which he
seized the piece of dried goat's flesh which I was able to offer him.

'Time presses, and we must come to the point,' said I. 'We want your
advice as to the weak points of yonder Abbey, and concerning the habits
of the rascals who infest it.'

He cried out something which I took to be Latin, with his hands clasped
and his eyes upturned. 'The prayer of the just availeth much,' said he,
'and yet I had not dared to hope that mine would have been so speedily
answered. In me you see the unfortunate Abbot of Almeixal, who has been
cast out by this rabble of three armies with their heretical leader. Oh!
to think of what I have lost!' his voice broke, and the tears hung upon
his lashes.

'Cheer up, sir,' said the Bart. 'I'll lay nine to four that we have you
back again by tomorrow night.'

It is not of my own welfare that I think,' said he, 'nor even of that of
my poor, scattered flock. But it is of the holy relics which are left in
the sacrilegious hands of these robbers.'

'It's even betting whether they would ever bother their heads about
them,' said the Bart. 'But show us the way inside the gates, and we'll
soon clear the place out for you.'

In a few short words the good Abbot gave us the very points that we
wished to know. But all that he said only made our task more formidable.
The walls of the Abbey were forty feet high. The lower windows were
barricaded, and the whole building loopholed for musketry fire. The gang
preserved military discipline, and their sentries were too numerous for
us to hope to take them by surprise. It was more than ever evident that
a battalion of grenadiers and a couple of breaching pieces were what was
needed. I raised my eyebrows, and the Bart began to whistle.

'We must have a shot at it, come what may,' said he.

The men had already dismounted, and, having watered their horses, were
eating their suppers. For my own part I went into the sitting-room of
the inn with the Abbot and the Bart, that we might talk about our plans.

I had a little cognac in my _sauve vie_, and I divided it among us--just
enough to wet our moustaches.

'It is unlikely,' said I, 'that those rascals know anything about our
coming. I have seen no signs of scouts along the road. My own plan is
that we should conceal ourselves in some neighbouring wood, and then,
when they open their gates, charge down upon them and take them by
surprise.'

The Bart was of opinion that this was the best that we could do, but,
when we came to talk it over, the Abbot made us see that there were
difficulties in the way.

'Save on the side of the town, there is no place within a mile of the
Abbey where you could shelter man or horse,' said he. 'As to the
townsfolk, they are not to be trusted. I fear, my son, that your
excellent plan would have little chance of success in the face of the
vigilant guard which these men keep.'

'I see no other way,' answered I. 'Hussars of Conflans are not so
plentiful that I can afford to run half a squadron of them against a
forty-foot wall with five hundred infantry behind it.'

'I am a man of peace,' said the Abbot, 'and yet I may, perhaps, give a
word of counsel. I know these villains and their ways. Who should do so
better, seeing that I have stayed for a month in this lonely spot,
looking down in weariness of heart at the Abbey which was my own? I will
tell you now what I should myself do if I were in your place.'

'Pray tell us, father,' we cried, both together.

'You must know that bodies of deserters, both French and English, are
continually coming in to them, carrying their weapons with them. Now,
what is there to prevent you and your men from pretending to be such a
body, and so making your way into the Abbey?'

I was amazed at the simplicity of the thing, and I embraced the good
Abbot. The Bart, however, had some objections to offer.

'That is all very well,' said he, 'but if these fellows are as sharp as
you say, it is not very likely that they are going to let a hundred
armed strangers into their crib. From all I have heard of Mr Morgan, or
Marshal Millefleurs, or whatever the rascal's name is, I give him credit
for more sense than that.'

'Well, then,' I cried, 'let us send fifty in, and let them at daybreak
throw open the gates to the other fifty, who will be waiting outside.'

We discussed the question at great length and with much foresight and
discretion. If it had been Massena and Wellington instead of two young
officers of light cavalry, we could not have weighed it all with more
judgment. At last we agreed, the Bart and I, that one of us should
indeed go with fifty men, under pretence of being deserters, and that in
the early morning he should gain command of the gate and admit the
others. The Abbot, it is true, was still of opinion that it was
dangerous to divide our force, but finding that we were both of the same
mind, he shrugged his shoulders and gave in.

'There is only one thing that I would ask,' said he. 'If you lay hands
upon this Marshal Millefleurs--this dog of a brigand--what will you do
with him?'

'Hang him,' I answered.

'It is too easy a death,' cried the Capuchin, with a vindictive glow in
his dark eyes. 'Had I my way with him--but, oh, what thoughts are these
for a servant of God to harbour!' He clapped his hands to his forehead
like one who is half demented by his troubles, and rushed out of the
room.

There was an important point which we had still to settle, and that was
whether the French or the English party should have the honour of
entering the Abbey first. My faith, it was asking a great deal of
Etienne Gerard that he should give place to any man at such a time! But
the poor Bart pleaded so hard, urging the few skirmishes which he had
seen against my four-and-seventy engagements, that at last I consented
that he should go. We had just clasped hands over the matter when there
broke out such a shouting and cursing and yelling from the front of the
inn, that out we rushed with our drawn sabres in our hands, convinced
that the brigands were upon us.

You may imagine our feelings when, by the light of the lantern which
hung from the porch, we saw a score of our hussars and dragoons all
mixed in one wild heap, red coats and blue, helmets and busbies,
pommelling each other to their hearts' content. We flung ourselves upon
them, imploring, threatening, tugging at a lace collar, or at a spurred
heel, until, at last, we had dragged them all apart. There they stood,
flushed and bleeding, glaring at each other, and all panting together
like a line of troop horses after a ten-mile chase. It was only with our
drawn swords that we could keep them from each other's throats. The poor
Capuchin stood in the porch in his long brown habit, wringing his hands
and calling upon all the saints for mercy.

He was, indeed, as I found upon inquiry, the innocent cause of all the
turmoil, for, not understanding how soldiers look upon such things, he
had made some remark to the English sergeant that it was a pity that his
squadron was not as good as the French. The words were not out of his
mouth before a dragoon knocked down the nearest hussar, and then, in a
moment, they all flew at each other like tigers. We would trust them no
more after that, but the Bart moved his men to the front of the inn, and
I mine to the back, the English all scowling and silent, and our fellows
shaking their fists and chattering, each after the fashion of their own
people.

Well, as our plans were made, we thought it best to carry them out at
once, lest some fresh cause of quarrel should break out between our
followers. The Bart and his men rode off, therefore, he having first
torn the lace from his sleeves, and the gorget and sash from his
uniform, so that he might pass as a simple trooper. He explained to his
men what it was that was expected of them, and though they did not raise
a cry or wave their weapons as mine might have done, there was an
expression upon their stolid and clean-shaven faces which filled me with
confidence. Their tunics were left unbuttoned, their scabbards and
helmets stained with dirt, and their harness badly fastened, so that
they might look the part of deserters, without order or discipline. At
six o'clock next morning they were to gain command of the main gate of
the Abbey, while at that same hour my hussars were to gallop up to it
from outside. The Bart and I pledged our words to it before he trotted
off with his detachment. My sergeant, Papilette, with two troopers,
followed the English at a distance, and returned in half an hour to say
that, after some parley, and the flashing of lanterns upon them from the
grille, they had been admitted into the Abbey.

So far, then, all had gone well. It was a cloudy night with a sprinkling
of rain, which was in our favour, as there was the less chance of our
presence being discovered. My vedettes I placed two hundred yards in
every direction, to guard against a surprise, and also to prevent any
peasant who might stumble upon us from carrying the news to the Abbey.
Oudin and Papilette were to take turns of duty, while the others with
their horses had snug quarters in a great wooden granary. Having walked
round and seen that all was as it should be, I flung myself upon the bed
which the innkeeper had set apart for me, and fell into a dreamless
sleep.

No doubt you have heard my name mentioned as being the beau-ideal of a
soldier, and that not only by friends and admirers like our
fellow-townsfolk, but also by old officers of the great wars who have
shared the fortunes of those famous campaigns with me. Truth and modesty
compel me to say, however, that this is not so. There are some gifts
which I lack--very few, no doubt--but, still, amid the vast armies of
the Emperor there may have been some who were free from those blemishes
which stood between me and perfection. Of bravery I say nothing. Those
who have seen me in the field are best fitted to speak about that. I
have often heard the soldiers discussing round the camp-fires as to who
was the bravest man in the Grand Army. Some said Murat, and some said
Lasalle, and some Ney; but for my own part, when they asked me, I merely
shrugged my shoulders and smiled. It would have seemed mere conceit if I
had answered that there was no man braver than Brigadier Gerard. At the
same time, facts are facts, and a man knows best what his own feelings
are. But there are other gifts besides bravery which are necessary for a
soldier, and one of them is that he should be a light sleeper. Now, from
my boyhood onwards, I have been hard to wake, and it was this which
brought me to ruin upon that night.

It may have been about two o'clock in the morning that I was suddenly
conscious of a feeling of suffocation. I tried to call out, but there
was something which prevented me from uttering a sound. I struggled to
rise, but I could only flounder like a hamstrung horse. I was strapped
at the ankles, strapped at the knees, and strapped again at the wrists.
Only my eyes were free to move, and there at the foot of my couch, by
the light of a Portuguese lamp, whom should I see but the Abbot and the
innkeeper!

The latter's heavy, white face had appeared to me when I looked upon it
the evening before to express nothing but stupidity and terror. Now, on
the contrary, every feature bespoke brutality and ferocity. Never have I
seen a more dreadful-looking villain. In his hand he held a long,
dull-coloured knife. The Abbot, on the other hand, was as polished and
as dignified as ever. His Capuchin gown had been thrown open, however,
and I saw beneath it a black, frogged coat, such as I have seen among
the English officers. As our eyes met he leaned over the wooden end of
the bed and laughed silently until it creaked again.

'You will, I am sure, excuse my mirth, my dear Colonel Gerard,' said he.
'The fact is, that the expression upon your face when you grasped the
situation was just a little funny. I have no doubt that you are an
excellent soldier, but I hardly think that you are fit to measure wits
with the Marshal Millefleurs, as your fellows have been good enough to
call me. You appear to have given me credit for singularly little
intelligence, which argues, if I may be allowed to say so, a want of
acuteness upon your own part. Indeed, with the single exception of my
thick-headed compatriot, the British dragoon, I have never met anyone
who was less competent to carry out such a mission.'

You can imagine how I felt and how I looked, as I listened to this
insolent harangue, which was all delivered in that flowery and
condescending manner which had gained this rascal his nickname. I could
say nothing, but they must have read my threat in my eyes, for the
fellow who had played the part of the innkeeper whispered something to
his companion.

'No, no, my dear Chenier, he will be infinitely more valuable alive,'
said he. 'By the way, Colonel, it is just as well that you are a sound
sleeper, for my friend here, who is a little rough in his ways, would
certainly have cut your throat if you had raised any alarm. I should
recommend you to keep in his good graces, for Sergeant Chenier, late of
the 7th Imperial Light Infantry, is a much more dangerous person than
Captain Alexis Morgan, of His Majesty's foot-guards.'

Chenier grinned and shook his knife at me, while I tried to look the
loathing which I felt at the thought that a soldier of the Emperor could
fall so low.

'It may amuse you to know,' said the Marshal, in that soft, suave voice
of his, 'that both your expeditions were watched from the time that you
left your respective camps. I think that you will allow that Chenier and
I played our parts with some subtlety. We had made every arrangement
for your reception at the Abbey, though we had hoped to receive the
whole squadron instead of half. When the gates are secured behind them,
our visitors will find themselves in a very charming little mediaeval
quadrangle, with no possible exit, commanded by musketry fire from a
hundred windows. They may choose to be shot down; or they may choose to
surrender. Between ourselves, I have not the slightest doubt that they
have been wise enough to do the latter. But since you are naturally
interested in the matter, we thought that you would care to come with us
and to see for yourself. I think I can promise you that you will find
your titled friend waiting for you at the Abbey with a face as long as
your own.'

The two villains began whispering together, debating, as far as I could
hear, which was the best way of avoiding my vedettes.

'I will make sure that it is all clear upon the other side of the barn,'
said the Marshal at last. 'You will stay here, my good Chenier, and if
the prisoner gives any trouble you will know what to do.'

So we were left together, this murderous renegade and I--he sitting at
the end of the bed, sharpening his knife upon his boot in the light of
the single smoky little oil-lamp. As to me, I only wonder now, as I look
back upon it, that I did not go mad with vexation and self-reproach as I
lay helplessly upon the couch, unable to utter a word or move a finger,
with the knowledge that my fifty gallant lads were so close to me, and
yet with no means of letting them know the straits to which I was
reduced. It was no new thing for me to be a prisoner; but to be taken by
these renegades, and to be led into their Abbey in the midst of their
jeers, befooled and out-witted by their insolent leaders--that was
indeed more than I could endure. The knife of the butcher beside me
would cut less deeply than that.

I twitched softly at my wrists, and then at my ankles, but whichever of
the two had secured me was no bungler at his work. I could not move
either of them an inch. Then I tried to work the handkerchief down over
my mouth, but the ruffian beside me raised his knife with such a
threatening snarl that I had to desist. I was lying still looking at his
bull neck, and wondering whether it would ever be my good fortune to fit
it for a cravat, when I heard returning steps coming down the inn
passage and up the stair. What word would the villain bring back? If he
found it impossible to kidnap me, he would probably murder me where I
lay. For my own part, I was indifferent which it might be, and I looked
at the doorway with the contempt and defiance which I longed to put into
words. But you can imagine my feelings, my dear friends, when, instead
of the tall figure and dark, sneering face of the Capuchin, my eyes fell
upon the grey pelisse and huge moustaches of my good little sub-officer,
Papilette!

The French soldier of those days had seen too much to be ever taken by
surprise. His eyes had hardly rested upon my bound figure and the
sinister face beside me before he had seen how the matter lay.

'Sacred name of a dog!' he growled, and out flashed his great sabre.
Chenier sprang forward at him with his knife, and then, thinking better
of it, he darted back and stabbed frantically at my heart. For my own
part, I had hurled myself off the bed on the side opposite to him, and
the blade grazed my side before ripping its way through blanket and
sheet. An instant later I heard the thud of a heavy fall, and then
almost simultaneously a second object struck the floor--something
lighter but harder, which rolled under the bed. I will not horrify you
with details, my friends. Suffice it that Papilette was one of the
strongest swordsmen in the regiment, and that his sabre was heavy and
sharp. It left a red blotch upon my wrists and my ankles, as it cut the
thongs which bound me.

When I had thrown off my gag, the first use which I made of my lips was
to kiss the sergeant's scarred cheeks. The next was to ask him if all
was well with the command. Yes, they had had no alarms. Oudin had just
relieved him, and he had come to report. Had he seen the Abbot? No, he
had seen nothing of him. Then we must form a cordon and prevent his
escape. I was hurrying out to give the orders, when I heard a slow and
measured step enter the door below, and come creaking up the stairs.

Papilette understood it all in an instant. 'You are not to kill him,' I
whispered, and thrust him into the shadow on one side of the door; I
crouched on the other. Up he came, up and up, and every footfall seemed
to be upon my heart. The brown skirt of his gown was not over the
threshold before we were both on him, like two wolves on a buck. Down we
crashed, the three of us, he fighting like a tiger, and with such
amazing strength that he might have broken away from the two of us.
Thrice he got to his feet, and thrice we had him over again, until
Papilette made him feel that there was a point to his sabre. He had
sense enough then to know that the game was up, and to lie still while I
lashed him with the very cords which had been round my own limbs.

'There has been a fresh deal, my fine fellow,' said I, 'and you will
find that I have some of the trumps in _my_ hand this time.'

'Luck always comes to the aid of a fool,' he answered. 'Perhaps it is as
well, otherwise the world would fall too completely into the power of
the astute. So, you have killed Chenier, I see. He was an insubordinate
dog, and always smelt abominably of garlic. Might I trouble you to lay
me upon the bed? The floor of these Portuguese tabernas is hardly a
fitting couch for anyone who has prejudices in favour of cleanliness.'

I could not but admire the coolness of the man, and the way in which he
preserved the same insolent air of condescension in spite of this sudden
turning of the tables. I dispatched Papilette to summon a guard, whilst
I stood over our prisoner with my drawn sword, never taking my eyes off
him for an instant, for I must confess that I had conceived a great
respect for his audacity and resource.

'I trust,' said he, 'that your men will treat me in a becoming manner.'

'You will get your deserts--you may depend upon that.'

'I ask nothing more. You may not be aware of my exalted birth, but I am
so placed that I cannot name my father without treason, nor my mother
without a scandal. I cannot _claim_ Royal honours, but these things are
so much more graceful when they are conceded without a claim. The thongs
are cutting my skin. Might I beg you to loosen them?'

'You do not give me credit for much intelligence,' I remarked, repeating
his own words.

'_Touché_,' he cried, like a pinked fencer. 'But here come your men, so
it matters little whether you loosen them or not.'

I ordered the gown to be stripped from him and placed him under a strong
guard. Then, as morning was already breaking, I had to consider what my
next step was to be. The poor Bart and his Englishmen had fallen victims
to the deep scheme which might, had we adopted all the crafty
suggestions of our adviser, have ended in the capture of the whole
instead of the half of our force. I must extricate them if it were still
possible. Then there was the old lady, the Countess of La Ronda, to be
thought of. As to the Abbey, since its garrison was on the alert it was
hopeless to think of capturing that. All turned now upon the value which
they placed upon their leader. The game depended upon my playing that
one card. I will tell you how boldly and how skilfully I played it.

It was hardly light before my bugler blew the assembly, and out we
trotted on to the plain. My prisoner was placed on horseback in the very
centre of the troops. It chanced that there was a large tree just out of
musket-shot from the main gate of the Abbey, and under this we halted.
Had they opened the great doors in order to attack us, I should have
charged home upon them; but, as I had expected, they stood upon the
defensive, lining the long wall and pouring down a torrent of hootings
and taunts and derisive laughter upon us. A few fired their muskets, but
finding that we were out of reach they soon ceased to waste their
powder. It was the strangest sight to see that mixture of uniforms,
French, English, and Portuguese, cavalry, infantry, and artillery, all
wagging their heads and shaking their fists at us.

My word, their hubbub soon died away when we opened our ranks, and
showed whom we had got in the midst of us! There was silence for a few
seconds, and then such a howl of rage and grief! I could see some of
them dancing like mad-men upon the wall. He must have been a singular
person, this prisoner of ours, to have gained the affection of such a
gang.

I had brought a rope from the inn, and we slung it over the lower bough
of the tree.

'You will permit me, monsieur, to undo your collar,' said Papilette,
with mock politeness.

'If your hands are perfectly clean,' answered our prisoner, and set the
whole half-squadron laughing.

There was another yell from the wall, followed by a profound hush as the
noose was tightened round Marshal Millefleurs' neck. Then came a shriek
from a bugle, the Abbey gates flew open, and three men rushed out waving
white cloths in their hands. Ah, how my heart bounded with joy at the
sight of them. And yet I would not advance an inch to meet them, so that
all the eagerness might seem to be upon their side. I allowed my
trumpeter, however, to wave a handkerchief in reply, upon which the
three envoys came running towards us. The Marshal, still pinioned, and
with the rope round his neck, sat his horse with a half smile, as one
who is slightly bored and yet strives out of courtesy not to show it.
If I were in such a situation I could not wish to carry myself better,
and surely I can say no more than that.

They were a singular trio, these ambassadors. The one was a Portuguese
caçadore in his dark uniform, the second a French chasseur in the
lightest green, and the third a big English artilleryman in blue and
gold. They saluted, all three, and the Frenchman did the talking.

'We have thirty-seven English dragoons in our hands,' said he. 'We give
you our most solemn oath that they shall all hang from the Abbey wall
within five minutes of the death of our Marshal.'

'Thirty-seven!' I cried. 'You have fifty-one.'

'Fourteen were cut down before they could be secured.'

'And the officer?'

'He would not surrender his sword save with his life. It was not our
fault. We would have saved him if we could.'

Alas for my poor Bart! I had met him but twice, and yet he was a man
very much after my heart. I have always had a regard for the English for
the sake of that one friend. A braver man and a worse swordsman I have
never met.

I did not, as you may think, take these rascals' word for anything.
Papilette was dispatched with one of them, and returned to say that it
was too true. I had now to think of the living.

'You will release the thirty-seven dragoons if I free your leader?'

'We will give you ten of them.'

'Up with him!' I cried.

'Twenty,' shouted the chasseur.

'No more words,' said I. 'Pull on the rope!'

'All of them,' cried the envoy, as the cord tightened round the
Marshal's neck.

'With horses and arms?'

They could see that I was not a man to jest with.

'All complete,' said the chasseur, sulkily.

'And the Countess of La Ronda as well?' said I.

But here I met with firmer opposition. No threats of mine could induce
them to give up the Countess. We tightened the cord. We moved the horse.
We did all but leave the Marshal suspended. If once I broke his neck the
dragoons were dead men. It was as precious to me as to them.

'Allow me to remark,' said the Marshal, blandly, 'that you are exposing
me to a risk of a quinsy. Do you not think, since there is a difference
of opinion upon this point, that it would be an excellent idea to
consult the lady herself? We would neither of us, I am sure, wish to
override her own inclinations.'

Nothing could be more satisfactory. You can imagine how quickly I
grasped at so simple a solution. In ten minutes she was before us, a
most stately dame, with her grey curls peeping out from under her
mantilla. Her face was as yellow as though it reflected the countless
doubloons of her treasury.

'This gentleman,' said the Marshal, 'is exceedingly anxious to convey
you to a place where you will never see us more. It is for you to decide
whether you would wish to go with him, or whether you prefer to remain
with me.'

She was at his horse's side in an instant. 'My own Alexis,' she cried,
'nothing can ever part us.'

He looked at me with a sneer upon his handsome face.

'By the way, you made a small slip of the tongue, my dear Colonel,' said
he. 'Except by courtesy, no such person exists as the Dowager Countess
of La Ronda. The lady whom I have the honour to present to you is my
very dear wife, Mrs Alexis Morgan--or shall I say Madame la Marèchale
Millefleurs?'

It was at this moment that I came to the conclusion that I was dealing
with the cleverest, and also the most unscrupulous, man whom I had ever
met. As I looked upon this unfortunate old woman my soul was filled with
wonder and disgust. As for her, her eyes were raised to his face with
such a look as a young recruit might give to the Emperor.

'So be it,' said I at last; 'give me the dragoons and let me go.'

They were brought out with their horses and weapons, and the rope was
taken from the Marshal's neck.

'Good-bye, my dear Colonel,' said he. 'I am afraid that you will have
rather a lame account to give of your mission, when you find your way
back to Massena, though, from all I hear, he will probably be too busy
to think of you. I am free to confess that you have extricated yourself
from your difficulties with greater ability than I had given you credit
for. I presume that there is nothing which I can do for you before you
go?'

'There is one thing.'

'And that is?'

'To give fitting burial to this young officer and his men.'

'I pledge my word to it.'

'And there is one other.'

'Name it.'

'To give me five minutes in the open with a sword in your hand and a
horse between your legs.'

'Tut, tut!' said he. 'I should either have to cut short your promising
career, or else to bid adieu to my own bonny bride. It is unreasonable
to ask such a request of a man in the first joys of matrimony.'

I gathered my horsemen together and wheeled them into column.

'Au revoir,' I cried, shaking my sword at him. 'The next time you may
not escape so easily.'

'Au revoir,' he answered. 'When you are weary of the Emperor, you will
always find a commission waiting for you in the service of the Marshal
Millefleurs.'




6. HOW THE BRIGADIER PLAYED FOR A KINGDOM


It has sometimes struck me that some of you, when you have heard me tell
these little adventures of mine, may have gone away with the impression
that I was conceited. There could not be a greater mistake than this,
for I have always observed that really fine soldiers are free from this
failing. It is true that I have had to depict myself sometimes as brave,
sometimes as full of resource, always as interesting; but, then, it
really was so, and I had to take the facts as I found them. It would be
an unworthy affectation if I were to pretend that my career has been
anything but a fine one. The incident which I will tell you tonight,
however, is one which you will understand that only a modest man would
describe. After all, when one has attained such a position as mine, one
can afford to speak of what an ordinary man might be tempted to conceal.

You must know, then, that after the Russian campaign the remains of our
poor army were quartered along the western bank of the Elbe, where they
might thaw their frozen blood and try, with the help of the good German
beer, to put a little between their skin and their bones. There were
some things which we could not hope to regain, for I daresay that three
large commissariat fourgons would not have sufficed to carry the fingers
and the toes which the army had shed during that retreat. Still, lean
and crippled as we were, we had much to be thankful for when we thought
of our poor comrades whom we had left behind, and of the snowfields--the
horrible, horrible snowfields. To this day, my friends, I do not care to
see red and white together. Even my red cap thrown down upon my white
counterpane has given me dreams in which I have seen those monstrous
plains, the reeling, tortured army, and the crimson smears which glared
upon the snow behind them. You will coax no story out of me about that
business, for the thought of it is enough to turn my wine to vinegar and
my tobacco to straw.

Of the half-million who crossed the Elbe in the autumn of the year '12
about forty thousand infantry were left in the spring of '13. But they
were terrible men, these forty thousand: men of iron, eaters of horses,
and sleepers in the snow; filled, too, with rage and bitterness against
the Russians. They would hold the Elbe until the great army of
conscripts, which the Emperor was raising in France, should be ready to
help them to cross it once more.

But the cavalry was in a deplorable condition. My own hussars were at
Borna, and when I paraded them first, I burst into tears at the sight of
them. My fine men and my beautiful horses--it broke my heart to see the
state to which they were reduced. 'But, courage,' I thought, 'they have
lost much, but their Colonel is still left to them.' I set to work,
therefore, to repair their disasters, and had already constructed two
good squadrons, when an order came that all colonels of cavalry should
repair instantly to the depôts of the regiments in France to organize
the recruits and the remounts for the coming campaign.

You will think, doubtless, that I was over-joyed at this chance of
visiting home once more. I will not deny that it was a pleasure to me to
know that I should see my mother again, and there were a few girls who
would be very glad at the news; but there were others in the army who
had a stronger claim. I would have given my place to any who had wives
and children whom they might not see again. However, there is no arguing
when the blue paper with the little red seal arrives, so within an hour
I was off upon my great ride from the Elbe to the Vosges. At last I was
to have a period of quiet. War lay behind my mare's tail and peace in
front of her nostrils. So I thought, as the sound of the bugles died in
the distance, and the long, white road curled away in front of me
through plain and forest and mountain, with France somewhere beyond the
blue haze which lay upon the horizon.

It is interesting, but it is also fatiguing, to ride in the rear of an
army. In the harvest time our soldiers could do without supplies, for
they had been trained to pluck the grain in the fields as they passed,
and to grind it for themselves in their bivouacs. It was at that time of
year, therefore, that those swift marches were performed which were the
wonder and the despair of Europe. But now the starving men had to be
made robust once more, and I was forced to draw into the ditch
continually as the Coburg sheep and the Bavarian bullocks came streaming
past with waggon loads of Berlin beer and good French cognac. Sometimes,
too, I would hear the dry rattle of the drums and the shrill whistle of
the fifes, and long columns of our good little infantry men would swing
past me with the white dust lying thick upon their blue tunics. These
were old soldiers drawn from the garrisons of our German fortresses, for
it was not until May that the new conscripts began to arrive from
France.

Well, I was rather tired of this eternal stopping and dodging, so that I
was not sorry when I came to Altenburg to find that the road divided,
and that I could take the southern and quieter branch. There were few
wayfarers between there and Greiz, and the road wound through groves of
oaks and beeches, which shot their branches across the path. You will
think it strange that a Colonel of hussars should again and again pull
up his horse in order to admire the beauty of the feathery branches and
the little, green, new-budded leaves, but if you had spent six months
among the fir trees of Russia you would be able to understand me.

There was something, however, which pleased me very much less than the
beauty of the forests, and that was the words and looks of the folk who
lived in the woodland villages. We had always been excellent friends
with the Germans, and during the last six years they had never seemed to
bear us any malice for having made a little free with their country. We
had shown kindnesses to the men and received them from the women, so
that good, comfortable Germany was a second home to all of us. But now
there was something which I could not understand in the behaviour of the
people. The travellers made no answer to my salute; the foresters turned
their heads away to avoid seeing me; and in the villages the folk would
gather into knots in the roadway and would scowl at me as I passed. Even
women would do this, and it was something new for me in those days to
see anything but a smile in a woman's eyes when they were turned upon
me.

It was in the hamlet of Schmolin, just ten miles out of Altenburg, that
the thing became most marked. I had stopped at the little inn there just
to damp my moustache and to wash the dust out of poor Violette's throat.
It was my way to give some little compliment, or possibly a kiss, to the
maid who served me; but this one would have neither the one nor the
other, but darted a glance at me like a bayonet-thrust. Then when I
raised my glass to the folk who drank their beer by the door they turned
their backs on me, save only one fellow, who cried, 'Here's a toast for
you, boys! Here's to the letter T!' At that they all emptied their beer
mugs and laughed; but it was not a laugh that had good-fellowship in it.

I was turning this over in my head and wondering what their boorish
conduct could mean, when I saw, as I rode from the village, a great T
new carved upon a tree. I had already seen more than one in my morning's
ride, but I had given no thought to them until the words of the
beer-drinker gave them an importance. It chanced that a
respectable-looking person was riding past me at the moment, so I turned
to him for information.

'Can you tell me, sir,' said I, 'what this letter T is?'

He looked at it and then at me in the most singular fashion. 'Young
man,' said he, 'it is not the letter N.' Then before I could ask further
he clapped his spurs into his horses ribs and rode, stomach to earth,
upon his way.

At first his words had no particular significance in my mind, but as I
trotted onwards Violette chanced to half turn her dainty head, and my
eyes were caught by the gleam of the brazen N's at the end of the
bridle-chain. It was the Emperor's mark. And those T's meant something
which was opposite to it. Things had been happening in Germany, then,
during our absence, and the giant sleeper had begun to stir. I thought
of the mutinous faces that I had seen, and I felt that if I could only
have looked into the hearts of these people I might have had some
strange news to bring into France with me. It made me the more eager to
get my remounts, and to see ten strong squadrons behind my kettle-drums
once more.

While these thoughts were passing through my head I had been alternately
walking and trotting, as a man should who has a long journey before, and
a willing horse beneath, him. The woods were very open at this point,
and beside the road there lay a great heap of fagots. As I passed there
came a sharp sound from among them, and, glancing round, I saw a face
looking out at me--a hot, red face, like that of a man who is beside
himself with excitement and anxiety. A second glance told me that it was
the very person with whom I had talked an hour before in the village.

'Come nearer!' he hissed. 'Nearer still! Now dismount and pretend to be
mending the stirrup leather. Spies may be watching us, and it means
death to me if I am seen helping you.'

'Death!' I whispered. 'From whom?'

'From the Tugendbund. From Lutzow's night-riders. You Frenchmen are
living on a powder magazine, and the match has been struck that will
fire it.'

'But this is all strange to me,' said I, still fumbling at the leathers
of my horse. 'What is this Tugendbund?'

'It is the secret society which has planned the great rising which is to
drive you out of Germany, just as you have been driven out of Russia.'

'And these T's stand for it?'

'They are the signal. I should have told you all this in the village,
but I dared not be seen speaking with you. I galloped through the woods
to cut you off, and concealed both my horse and myself.'

'I am very much indebted to you,' said I, 'and the more so as you are
the only German that I have met today from whom I have had common
civility.'

'All that I possess I have gained through contracting for the French
armies,' said he. 'Your Emperor has been a good friend to me. But I beg
that you will ride on now, for we have talked long enough. Beware only
of Lutzow's night-riders!'

'Banditti?' I asked.

'All that is best in Germany,' said he. 'But for God's sake ride
forwards, for I have risked my life and exposed my good name in order to
carry you this warning.'

Well, if I had been heavy with thought before, you can think how I felt
after my strange talk with the man among the fagots. What came home to
me even more than his words was his shivering, broken voice, his
twitching face, and his eyes glancing swiftly to right and left, and
opening in horror whenever a branch cracked upon a tree. It was clear
that he was in the last extremity of terror, and it is possible that he
had cause, for shortly after I had left him I heard a distant gunshot
and a shouting from somewhere behind me. It may have been some sportsman
halloaing to his dogs, but I never again heard of or saw the man who had
given me my warning.

I kept a good look-out after this, riding swiftly where the country was
open, and slowly where there might be an ambuscade. It was serious for
me, since 500 good miles of German soil lay in front of me; but somehow
I did not take it very much to heart, for the Germans had always seemed
to me to be a kindly, gentle people, whose hands closed more readily
round a pipe-stem than a sword-hilt--not out of want of valour, you
understand, but because they are genial, open souls, who would rather be
on good terms with all men. I did not know then that beneath that homely
surface there lurks a devilry as fierce as, and far more persistent
than, that of the Castilian or the Italian.

And it was not long before I had shown to me that there was something
more serious abroad than rough words and hard looks. I had come to a
spot where the road runs upwards through a wild tract of heath-land and
vanishes into an oak wood. I may have been half-way up the hill when,
looking forward, I saw something gleaming under the shadow of the
tree-trunks, and a man came out with a coat which was so slashed and
spangled with gold that he blazed like a fire in the sunlight. He
appeared to be very drunk, for he reeled and staggered as he came
towards me. One of his hands was held up to his ear and clutched a great
red handkerchief, which was fixed to his neck.

I had reined up the mare and was looking at him with some disgust, for
it seemed strange to me that one who wore so gorgeous a uniform should
show himself in such a state in broad daylight. For his part, he looked
hard in my direction and came slowly onwards, stopping from time to time
and swaying about as he gazed at me. Suddenly, as I again advanced, he
screamed out his thanks to Christ, and, lurching forwards, he fell with
a crash upon the dusty road. His hands flew forward with the fall, and I
saw that what I had taken for a red cloth was a monstrous wound, which
had left a great gap in his neck, from which a dark blood-clot hung,
like an epaulette upon his shoulder.

'My God!' I cried, as I sprang to his aid. 'And I thought that you were
drunk!'

'Not drunk, but dying,' said he. 'But thank Heaven that I have seen a
French officer while I have still strength to speak.'

I laid him among the heather and poured some brandy down his throat. All
round us was the vast countryside, green and peaceful, with nothing
living in sight save only the mutilated man beside me.

'Who has done this?' I asked, 'and what are you? You are French, and yet
the uniform is strange to me.'

'It is that of the Emperor's new guard of honour. I am the Marquis of
Château St Arnaud, and I am the ninth of my blood who has died in the
service of France. I have been pursued and wounded by the night-riders
of Lutzow, but I hid among the brushwood yonder, and waited in the hope
that a Frenchman might pass. I could not be sure at first if you were
friend or foe, but I felt that death was very near, and that I must take
the chance.'

'Keep your heart up, comrade,' said I; 'I have seen a man with a worse
wound who has lived to boast of it.'

'No, no,' he whispered; 'I am going fast.' He laid his hand upon mine as
he spoke, and I saw that his finger-nails were already blue. 'But I have
papers here in my tunic which you must carry at once to the Prince of
Saxe-Felstein, at his Castle of Hof. He is still true to us, but the
Princess is our deadly enemy. She is striving to make him declare
against us. If he does so, it will determine all those who are wavering,
for the King of Prussia is his uncle and the King of Bavaria his cousin.
These papers will hold him to us if they can only reach him before he
takes the last step. Place them in his hands tonight, and, perhaps, you
will have saved all Germany for the Emperor. Had my horse not been shot,
I might, wounded as I am----' He choked, and the cold hand tightened
into a grip, which left mine as bloodless as itself. Then, with a groan,
his head jerked back, and it was all over with him.

Here was a fine start for my journey home. I was left with a commission
of which I knew little, which would lead me to delay the pressing needs
of my hussars, and which at the same time was of such importance that it
was impossible for me to avoid it. I opened the Marquis's tunic, the
brilliance of which had been devised by the Emperor in order to attract
those young aristocrats from whom he hoped to raise these new regiments
of his Guard. It was a small packet of papers which I drew out, tied up
with silk, and addressed to the Prince of Saxe-Felstein. In the corner,
in a sprawling, untidy hand, which I knew to be the Emperor's own, was
written: 'Pressing and most important.' It was an order to me, those
four words--an order as clear as if it had come straight from the firm
lips with the cold grey eyes looking into mine. My troopers might wait
for their horses, the dead Marquis might lie where I had laid him
amongst the heather, but if the mare and her rider had a breath left in
them the papers should reach the Prince that night.

I should not have feared to ride by the road through the wood, for I
have learned in Spain that the safest time to pass through a guerilla
country is after an outrage, and that the moment of danger is when all
is peaceful. When I came to look upon my map, however, I saw that Hof
lay further to the south of me, and that I might reach it more directly
by keeping to the moors. Off I set, therefore, and had not gone fifty
yards before two carbine shots rang out of the brushwood and a bullet
hummed past me like a bee. It was clear that the night-riders were
bolder in their ways than the brigands of Spain, and that my mission
would have ended where it had begun if I had kept to the road.

It was a mad ride, that--a ride with a loose rein, girth-deep in heather
and in gorse, plunging through bushes, flying down hill-sides, with my
neck at the mercy of my dear little Violette. But she--she never
slipped, she never faltered, as swift and as surefooted as if she knew
that her rider carried the fate of all Germany beneath the buttons of
his pelisse. And I--I had long borne the name of being the best
horseman in the six brigades of light cavalry, but I never rode as I
rode then. My friend the Bart had told me of how they hunt the fox in
England, but the swiftest fox would have been captured by me that day.
The wild pigeons which flew overhead did not take a straighter course
than Violette and I below. As an officer, I have always been ready to
sacrifice myself for my men, though the Emperor would not have thanked
me for it, for he had many men, but only one--well, cavalry leaders of
the first class are rare.

But here I had an object which was indeed worth a sacrifice, and I
thought no more of my life than of the clods of earth that flew from my
darling's heels.

We struck the road once more as the light was failing, and galloped into
the little village of Lobenstein. But we had hardly got upon the
cobblestones when off came one of the mare's shoes, and I had to lead
her to the village smithy. His fire was low, and his day's work done, so
that it would be an hour at the least before I could hope to push on to
Hof. Cursing at the delay, I strode into the village inn and ordered a
cold chicken and some wine to be served for my dinner. It was but a few
miles to Hof, and I had every hope that I might deliver my papers to the
Prince on that very night, and be on my way for France next morning with
despatches for the Emperor in my bosom. I will tell you now what befell
me in the inn of Lobenstein.

The chicken had been served and the wine drawn, and I had turned upon
both as a man may who has ridden such a ride, when I was aware of a
murmur and a scuffling in the hall outside my door. At first I thought
that it was some brawl between peasants in their cups, and I left them
to settle their own affairs. But of a sudden there broke from among the
low, sullen growl of the voices such a sound as would send Etienne
Gerard leaping from his death-bed. It was the whimpering cry of a woman
in pain. Down clattered my knife and my fork, and in an instant I was
in the thick of the crowd which had gathered outside my door.

The heavy-cheeked landlord was there and his flaxen-haired wife, the two
men from the stables, a chambermaid, and two or three villagers. All of
them, women and men, were flushed and angry, while there in the centre
of them, with pale cheeks and terror in her eyes, stood the loveliest
woman that ever a soldier would wish to look upon. With her queenly head
thrown back, and a touch of defiance mingled with her fear, she looked
as she gazed round her like a creature of a different race from the
vile, coarse-featured crew who surrounded her. I had not taken two steps
from my door before she sprang to meet me, her hand resting upon my arm
and her blue eyes sparkling with joy and triumph.

'A French soldier and gentleman!' she cried. 'Now at last I am safe.'

'Yes, madam, you are safe,' said I, and I could not resist taking her
hand in mine in order that I might reassure her. 'You have only to
command me,' I added, kissing the hand as a sign that I meant what I was
saying.

'I am Polish,' she cried; 'the Countess Palotta is my name. They abuse
me because I love the French. I do not know what they might have done to
me had Heaven not sent you to my help.'

I kissed her hand again lest she should doubt my intentions. Then I
turned upon the crew with such an expression as I know how to assume. In
an instant the hall was empty.

'Countess,' said I, 'you are now under my protection. You are faint, and
a glass of wine is necessary to restore you.' I offered her my arm and
escorted her into my room, where she sat by my side at the table and
took the refreshment which I offered her.

How she blossomed out in my presence, this woman, like a flower before
the sun! She lit up the room with her beauty. She must have read my
admiration in my eyes, and it seemed to me that I also could see
something of the sort in her own. Ah! my friends, I was no
ordinary-looking man when I was in my thirtieth year. In the whole light
cavalry it would have been hard to find a finer pair of whiskers.
Murat's may have been a shade longer, but the best judges are agreed
that Murat's were a shade too long. And then I had a manner. Some women
are to be approached in one way and some in another, just as a siege is
an affair of fascines and gabions in hard weather and of trenches in
soft. But the man who can mix daring with timidity, who can be
outrageous with an air of humility, and presumptuous with a tone of
deference, that is the man whom mothers have to fear. For myself, I felt
that I was the guardian of this lonely lady, and knowing what a
dangerous man I had to deal with, I kept strict watch upon myself.
Still, even a guardian has his privileges, and I did not neglect them.

But her talk was as charming as her face. In a few words she explained
that she was travelling to Poland, and that her brother who had been her
escort had fallen ill upon the way. She had more than once met with
ill-treatment from the country folk because she could not conceal her
good-will towards the French. Then turning from her own affairs she
questioned me about the army, and so came round to myself and my own
exploits. They were familiar to her, she said, for she knew several of
Poniatowski's officers, and they had spoken of my doings. Yet she would
be glad to hear them from my own lips. Never have I had so delightful a
conversation. Most women make the mistake of talking rather too much
about their own affairs, but this one listened to my tales just as you
are listening now, ever asking for more and more and more. The hours
slipped rapidly by, and it was with horror that I heard the village
clock strike eleven, and so learned that for four hours I had forgotten
the Emperor's business.

'Pardon me, my dear lady,' I cried, springing to my feet, 'but I must
go on instantly to Hof.'

She rose also, and looked at me with a pale, reproachful face. 'And me?'
she said. 'What is to become of me?'

'It is the Emperor's affair. I have already stayed far too long. My duty
calls me, and I must go.'

'You must go? And I must be abandoned alone to these savages? Oh, why
did I ever meet you? Why did you ever teach me to rely upon your
strength?' Her eyes glazed over, and in an instant she was sobbing upon
my bosom.

Here was a trying moment for a guardian! Here was a time when he had to
keep a watch upon a forward young officer. But I was equal to it. I
smoothed her rich brown hair and whispered such consolations as I could
think of in her ear, with one arm round her, it is true, but that was to
hold her lest she should faint. She turned her tear-stained face to
mine. 'Water,' she whispered. 'For God's sake, water!'

I saw that in another moment she would be senseless. I laid the drooping
head upon the sofa, and then rushed furiously from the room, hunting
from chamber to chamber for a carafe. It was some minutes before I could
get one and hurry back with it. You can imagine my feelings to find the
room empty and the lady gone.

Not only was she gone, but her cap and silver-mounted riding switch
which had lain upon the table were gone also. I rushed out and roared
for the landlord. He knew nothing of the matter, had never seen the
woman before, and did not care if he never saw her again. Had the
peasants at the door seen anyone ride away? No, they had seen nobody. I
searched here and searched there, until at last I chanced to find myself
in front of a mirror, where I stood with my eyes staring and my jaw as
far dropped as the chin-strap of my shako would allow.

Four buttons of my pelisse were open, and it did not need me to put my
hand up to know that my precious papers were gone. Oh! the depth of
cunning that lurks in a woman's heart. She had robbed me, this creature,
robbed me as she clung to my breast. Even while I smoothed her hair, and
whispered kind words into her ear, her hands had been at work beneath my
dolman. And here I was, at the very last step of my journey, without the
power of carrying out this mission which had already deprived one good
man of his life, and was likely to rob another one of his credit. What
would the Emperor say when he heard that I had lost his despatches?
Would the army believe it of Etienne Gerard? And when they heard that a
woman's hand had coaxed them from me, what laughter there would be at
mess-table and at camp-fire! I could have rolled upon the ground in my
despair.

But one thing was certain--all this affair of the fracas in the hall and
the persecution of the so-called Countess was a piece of acting from the
beginning. This villainous innkeeper must be in the plot. From him I
might learn who she was and where my papers had gone. I snatched my
sabre from the table and rushed out in search of him. But the scoundrel
had guessed what I would do, and had made his preparations for me. It
was in the corner of the yard that I found him, a blunderbuss in his
hands and a mastiff held upon a leash by his son. The two stable-hands,
with pitchforks, stood upon either side, and the wife held a great
lantern behind him, so as to guide his aim.

'Ride away, sir, ride away!' he cried, with a crackling voice. 'Your
horse is at the door, and no one will meddle with you if you go your
way; but if you come against us, you are alone against three brave men.'

I had only the dog to fear, for the two forks and the blunderbuss were
shaking about like branches in a wind. Still, I considered that, though
I might force an answer with my sword-point at the throat of this fat
rascal, still I should have no means of knowing whether that answer was
the truth. It would be a struggle, then, with much to lose and nothing
certain to gain. I looked them up and down, therefore, in a way that
set their foolish weapons shaking worse than ever, and then, throwing
myself upon my mare, I galloped away with the shrill laughter of the
landlady jarring upon my ears.

I had already formed my resolution. Although I had lost my papers, I
could make a very good guess as to what their contents would be, and
this I would say from my own lips to the Prince of Saxe-Felstein, as
though the Emperor had commissioned me to convey it in that way. It was
a bold stroke and a dangerous one, but if I went too far I could
afterwards be disavowed. It was that or nothing, and when all Germany
hung on the balance the game should not be lost if the nerve of one man
could save it.

It was midnight when I rode into Hof, but every window was blazing,
which was enough it itself, in that sleepy country, to tell the ferment
of excitement in which the people were. There was hooting and jeering as
I rode through the crowded streets, and once a stone sang past my head,
but I kept upon my way, neither slowing nor quickening my pace, until I
came to the palace. It was lit from base to battlement, and the dark
shadows, coming and going against the yellow glare, spoke of the turmoil
within. For my part, I handed my mare to a groom at the gate, and
striding in I demanded, in such a voice as an ambassador should have, to
see the Prince instantly, upon business which would brook no delay.

The hall was dark, but I was conscious as I entered of a buzz of
innumerable voices, which hushed into silence as I loudly proclaimed my
mission. Some great meeting was being held then--a meeting which, as my
instincts told me, was to decide this very question of war and peace. It
was possible that I might still be in time to turn the scale for the
Emperor and for France. As to the major-domo, he looked blackly at me,
and showing me into a small ante-chamber he left me. A minute later he
returned to say that the Prince could not be disturbed at present, but
that the Princess would take my message.

The Princess! What use was there in giving it to her? Had I not been
warned that she was German in heart and soul, and that it was she who
was turning her husband and her State against us?

'It is the Prince that I must see,' said I.

'Nay, it is the Princess,' said a voice at the door, and a woman swept
into the chamber. 'Von Rosen, you had best stay with us. Now, sir, what
is it that you have to say to either Prince or Princess of
Saxe-Felstein?'

At the first sound of the voice I had sprung to my feet. At the first
glance I had thrilled with anger. Not twice in a lifetime does one meet
that noble figure, that queenly head, and those eyes as blue as the
Garonne, and as chilling as her winter waters.

'Time presses, sir!' she cried, with an impatient tap of her foot. 'What
have you to say to me?'

'What have I to say to you?' I cried. 'What can I say, save that you
have taught me never to trust a woman more? You have ruined and
dishonoured me for ever.'

She looked with arched brows at her attendant.

'Is this the raving of fever, or does it come from some less innocent
cause?' said she. 'Perhaps a little blood-letting--'

'Ah, you can act!' I cried. 'You have shown me that already.'

'Do you mean that we have met before?'

'I mean that you have robbed me within the last two hours.'

'This is past all bearing,' she cried, with an admirable affectation of
anger. 'You claim, as I understand, to be an ambassador, but there are
limits to the privileges which such an office brings with it.'

'You brazen it admirably,' said I. 'Your Highness will not make a fool
of me twice in one night.' I sprang forward and, stooping down, caught
up the hem of her dress. 'You would have done well to change it after
you had ridden so far and so fast,' said I.

It was like the dawn upon a snow-peak to see her ivory cheeks flush
suddenly to crimson.

'Insolent!' she cried. 'Call the foresters and have him thrust from the
palace'

'I will see the Prince first.'

'You will never see the Prince. Ah! Hold him, Von Rosen, hold him.'

She had forgotten the man with whom she had to deal--was it likely that
I would wait until they could bring their rascals? She had shown me her
cards too soon. Her game was to stand between me and her husband. Mine
was to speak face to face with him at any cost. One spring took me out
of the chamber. In another I had crossed the hall. An instant later I
had burst into the great room from which the murmur of the meeting had
come. At the far end I saw a figure upon a high chair under a daïs.
Beneath him was a line of high dignitaries, and then on every side I saw
vaguely the heads of a vast assembly. Into the centre of the room I
strode, my sabre clanking, my shako under my arm.

'I am the messenger of the Emperor,' I shouted. 'I bear his message to
His Highness the Prince of Saxe-Felstein.'

The man beneath the daïs raised his head, and I saw that his face was
thin and wan, and that his back was bowed as though some huge burden was
balanced between his shoulders.

'Your name, sir?' he asked.

'Colonel Etienne Gerard, of the Third Hussars.'

Every face in the gathering was turned upon me, and I heard the rustle
of the innumerable necks and saw countless eyes without meeting one
friendly one amongst them. The woman had swept past me, and was
whispering, with many shakes of her head and dartings of her hands, into
the Prince's ear. For my own part I threw out my chest and curled my
moustache, glancing round in my own debonair fashion at the assembly.
They were men, all of them, professors from the college, a sprinkling of
their students, soldiers, gentlemen, artisans, all very silent and
serious. In one corner there sat a group of men in black, with
riding-coats drawn over their shoulders. They leaned their heads to each
other, whispering under their breath, and with every movement I caught
the clank of their sabres or the clink of their spurs.

'The Emperor's private letter to me informs me that it is the Marquis
Château St Arnaud who is bearing his despatches,' said the Prince.

'The Marquis has been foully murdered,' I answered, and a buzz rose up
from the people as I spoke. Many heads were turned, I noticed, towards
the dark men in the cloaks.

'Where are your papers?' asked the Prince.

'I have none.'

A fierce clamour rose instantly around me. 'He is a spy! He plays a
part!' they cried. 'Hang him!' roared a deep voice from the corner, and
a dozen others took up the shout. For my part, I drew out my
handkerchief and nicked the dust from the fur of my pelisse. The Prince
held out his thin hands, and the tumult died away.

'Where, then, are your credentials, and what is your message?'

'My uniform is my credential, and my message is for your private ear.'

He passed his hand over his forehead with the gesture of a weak man who
is at his wits' end what to do. The Princess stood beside him with her
hand upon his throne, and again whispered in his ear.

'We are here in council together, some of my trusty subjects and
myself,' said he. 'I have no secrets from them, and whatever message the
Emperor may send to me at such a time concerns their interests no less
than mine.'

There was a hum of applause at this, and every eye was turned once more
upon me. My faith, it was an awkward position in which I found myself,
for it is one thing to address eight hundred hussars, and another to
speak to such an audience on such a subject. But I fixed my eyes upon
the Prince, and tried to say just what I should have said if we had been
alone, shouting it out, too, as though I had my regiment on parade.

'You have often expressed friendship for the Emperor,' I cried. 'It is
now at last that this friendship is about to be tried. If you will stand
firm, he will reward you as only he can reward. It is an easy thing for
him to turn a Prince into a King and a province into a power. His eyes
are fixed upon you, and though you can do little to harm him, you can
ruin yourself. At this moment he is crossing the Rhine with two hundred
thousand men. Every fortress in the country is in his hands. He will be
upon you in a week, and if you have played him false, God help both you
and your people. You think that he is weakened because a few of us got
the chilblains last winter. Look there!' I cried, pointing to a great
star which blazed through the window above the Prince's head. 'That is
the Emperor's star. When it wanes, he will wane--but not before.'

You would have been proud of me, my friends, if you could have seen and
heard me, for I clashed my sabre as I spoke, and swung my dolman as
though my regiment was picketed outside in the courtyard. They listened
to me in silence, but the back of the Prince bowed more and more as
though the burden which weighed upon it was greater than his strength.
He looked round with haggard eyes.

'We have heard a Frenchman speak for France,' said he. 'Let us have a
German speak for Germany.'

The folk glanced at each other, and whispered to their neighbours. My
speech, as I think, had its effect, and no man wished to be the first to
commit himself in the eyes of the Emperor. The Princess looked round
her with blazing eyes, and her clear voice broke the silence.

'Is a woman to give this Frenchman his answer?' she cried. 'Is it
possible, then, that among the night-riders of Lutzow there is none who
can use his tongue as well as his sabre?'

Over went a table with a crash, and a young man had bounded upon one of
the chairs. He had the face of one inspired--pale, eager, with wild hawk
eyes, and tangled hair. His sword hung straight from his side, and his
riding-boots were brown with mire.

'It is Korner!' the people cried. 'It is young Korner, the poet! Ah, he
will sing, he will sing.'

And he sang! It was soft, at first, and dreamy, telling of old Germany,
the mother of nations, of the rich, warm plains, and the grey cities,
and the fame of dead heroes. But then verse after verse rang like a
trumpet-call. It was of the Germany of now, the Germany which had been
taken unawares and overthrown, but which was up again, and snapping the
bonds upon her giant limbs. What was life that one should covet it? What
was glorious death that one should shun it? The mother, the great
mother, was calling. Her sigh was in the night wind. She was crying to
her own children for help. Would they come? Would they come? Would they
come?

Ah, that terrible song, the spirit face and the ringing voice! Where
were I, and France, and the Emperor? They did not shout, these
people--they howled. They were up on the chairs and the tables. They
were raving, sobbing, the tears running down their faces. Korner had
sprung from the chair, and his comrades were round him with their sabres
in the air. A flush had come into the pale face of the Prince, and he
rose from his throne.

'Colonel Gerard,' said he, 'you have heard the answer which you are to
carry to your Emperor. The die is cast, my children. Your Prince and you
must stand or fall together.'

He bowed to show that all was over, and the people with a shout made
for the door to carry the tidings into the town. For my own part, I had
done all that a brave man might, and so I was not sorry to be carried
out amid the stream. Why should I linger in the palace? I had had my
answer and must carry it, such as it was. I wished neither to see Hof
nor its people again until I entered it at the head of a vanguard. I
turned from the throng, then, and walked silently and sadly in the
direction in which they had led the mare.

It was dark down there by the stables, and I was peering round for the
hostler, when suddenly my two arms were seized from behind. There were
hands at my wrists and at my throat, and I felt the cold muzzle of a
pistol under my ear.

'Keep your lips closed, you French dog,' whispered a fierce voice. 'We
have him, captain.'

'Have you the bridle?'

'Here it is.'

'Sling it over his head.'

I felt the cold coil of leather tighten round my neck. An hostler with a
stable lantern had come out and was gazing upon the scene. In its dim
light I saw stern faces breaking everywhere through the gloom, with the
black caps and dark cloaks of the night-riders.

'What would you do with him, captain?' cried a voice.

'Hang him at the palace gate.'

'An ambassador?'

'An ambassador without papers.'

'But the Prince?'

'Tut, man, do you not see that the Prince will then be committed to our
side? He will be beyond all hope of forgiveness. At present he may swing
round tomorrow as he has done before. He may eat his words, but a dead
hussar is more than he can explain.'

'No, no, Von Strelitz, we cannot do it,' said another voice.

'Can we not? I shall show you that!' and there came a jerk on the
bridle which nearly pulled me to the ground. At the same instant a sword
flashed and the leather was cut through within two inches of my neck.

'By Heaven, Korner, this is rank mutiny,' cried the captain. 'You may
hang yourself before you are through with it.'

'I have drawn my sword as a soldier and not as a brigand,' said the
young poet. 'Blood may dim its blade, but never dishonour. Comrades,
will you stand by and see this gentleman mishandled?'

A dozen sabres flew from their sheaths, and it was evident that my
friends and my foes were about equally balanced. But the angry voices
and the gleam of steel had brought the folk running from all parts.

'The Princess!' they cried. 'The Princess is coming!'

And even as they spoke I saw her in front of us, her sweet face framed
in the darkness. I had cause to hate her, for she had cheated and
befooled me, and yet it thrilled me then and thrills me now to think
that my arms have embraced her, and that I have felt the scent of her
hair in my nostrils. I know not whether she lies under her German earth,
or whether she still lingers, a grey-haired woman in her Castle of Hof,
but she lives ever, young and lovely, in the heart and memory of Etienne
Gerard.

'For shame!' she cried, sweeping up to me, and tearing with her own
hands the noose from my neck. 'You are fighting in God's own quarrel,
and yet you would begin with such a devil's deed as this. This man is
mine, and he who touches a hair of his head will answer for it to me.'

They were glad enough to slink off into the darkness before those
scornful eyes. Then she turned once more to me.

'You can follow me, Colonel Gerard,' she said. 'I have a word that I
would speak to you.'

I walked behind her to the chamber into which I had originally been
shown. She closed the door, and then looked at me with the archest
twinkle in her eyes.

'Is it not confiding of me to trust myself with you?' said she. 'You
will remember that it is the Princess of Saxe-Felstein and not the poor
Countess Palotta of Poland.'

'Be the name what it might,' I answered, 'I helped a lady whom I
believed to be in distress, and I have been robbed of my papers and
almost of my honour as a reward.'

'Colonel Gerard,' said she, 'we have been playing a game, you and I, and
the stake was a heavy one. You have shown by delivering a message which
was never given to you that you would stand at nothing in the cause of
your country. My heart is German and yours is French, and I also would
go all lengths, even to deceit and to theft, if at this crisis I could
help my suffering fatherland. You see how frank I am.'

'You tell me nothing that I have not seen.'

'But now that the game is played and won, why should we bear malice? I
will say this, that if ever I were in such a plight as that which I
pretended in the inn of Lobenstein, I should never wish to meet a more
gallant protector or a truer-hearted gentleman than Colonel Etienne
Gerard. I had never thought that I could feel for a Frenchman as I felt
for you when I slipped the papers from your breast.'

'But you took them, none the less.'

'They were necessary to me and to Germany. I knew the arguments which
they contained and the effect which they would have upon the Prince. If
they had reached him all would have been lost.'

'Why should your Highness descend to such expedients when a score of
these brigands, who wished to hang me at your castle gate, would have
done the work as well?'

'They are not brigands, but the best blood of Germany,' she cried,
hotly. 'If you have been roughly used, you will remember the indignities
to which every German has been subjected, from the Queen of Prussia
downwards. As to why I did not have you waylaid upon the road, I may say
that I had parties out on all sides, and that I was waiting at
Lobenstein to hear of their success. When instead of their news you
yourself arrived I was in despair, for there was only the one weak woman
betwixt you and my husband. You see the straits to which I was driven
before I used the weapon of my sex.'

'I confess that you have conquered me, your Highness, and it only
remains for me to leave you in possession of the field.'

'But you will take your papers with you.' She held them out to me as she
spoke. 'The Prince has crossed the Rubicon now, and nothing can bring
him back. You can return these to the Emperor, and tell him that we
refused to receive them. No one can accuse you then of having lost your
despatches. Good-bye, Colonel Gerard, and the best I can wish you is
that when you reach France you may remain there. In a year's time there
will be no place for a Frenchman upon this side of the Rhine.'

And thus it was that I played the Princess of Saxe-Felstein with all
Germany for a stake, and lost my game to her. I had much to think of as
I walked my poor, tired Violette along the highway which leads westward
from Hof. But amid all the thoughts there came back to me always the
proud, beautiful face of the German woman, and the voice of the
soldier-poet as he sang from the chair. And I understood then that there
was something terrible in this strong, patient Germany--this mother root
of nations--and I saw that such a land, so old and so beloved, never
could be conquered. And as I rode I saw that the dawn was breaking, and
that the great star at which I had pointed through the palace window was
dim and pale in the western sky.




7. HOW THE BRIGADIER WON HIS MEDAL


The Duke of Tarentum, or Macdonald, as his old comrades prefer to call
him, was, as I could perceive, in the vilest of tempers. His grim,
Scotch face was like one of those grotesque door-knockers which one sees
in the Faubourg St Germain. We heard afterwards that the Emperor had
said in jest that he would have sent him against Wellington in the
South, but that he was afraid to trust him within the sound of the
pipes. Major Charpentier and I could plainly see that he was smouldering
with anger.

'Brigadier Gerard of the Hussars,' said he, with the air of the corporal
with the recruit.

I saluted.

'Major Charpentier of the Horse Grenadiers.'

My companion answered to his name.

'The Emperor has a mission for you.'

Without more ado he flung open the door and announced us.

I have seen Napoleon ten times on horseback to once on foot, and I think
that he does wisely to show himself to the troops in this fashion, for
he cuts a very good figure in the saddle. As we saw him now he was the
shortest man out of six by a good hand's breadth, and yet I am no very
big man myself, though I ride quite heavy enough for a hussar. It is
evident, too, that his body is too long for his legs. With his big,
round head, his curved shoulders, and his clean-shaven face, he is more
like a Professor at the Sorbonne than the first soldier in France. Every
man to his taste, but it seems to me that, if I could clap a pair of
fine light cavalry whiskers, like my own, on to him, it would do him no
harm. He has a firm mouth, however, and his eyes are remarkable. I have
seen them once turned on me in anger, and I had rather ride at a square
on a spent horse than face them again. I am not a man who is easily
daunted, either.

He was standing at the side of the room, away from the window, looking
up at a great map of the country which was hung upon the wall. Berthier
stood beside him, trying to look wise, and just as we entered, Napoleon
snatched his sword impatiently from him and pointed with it on the map.
He was talking fast and low, but I heard him say, 'The valley of the
Meuse,' and twice he repeated 'Berlin.' As we entered, his aide-de-camp
advanced to us, but the Emperor stopped him and beckoned us to his side.

'You have not yet received the cross of honour, Brigadier Gerard?' he
asked.

I replied that I had not, and was about to add that it was not for want
of having deserved it, when he cut me short in his decided fashion.

'And you, Major?' he asked.

'No, sire.'

'Then you shall both have your opportunity now.'

He led us to the great map upon the wall and placed the tip of
Berthier's sword on Rheims.

'I will be frank with you, gentlemen, as with two comrades. You have
both been with me since Marengo, I believe?' He had a strangely pleasant
smile, which used to light up his pale face with a kind of cold
sunshine. 'Here at Rheims are our present headquarters on this the 14th
of March. Very good. Here is Paris, distant by road a good twenty-five
leagues. Blucher lies to the north, Schwarzenberg to the south.' He
prodded at the map with the sword as he spoke.

'Now,' said he, 'the further into the country these people march, the
more completely I shall crush them. They are about to advance upon
Paris. Very good. Let them do so. My brother, the King of Spain, will be
there with a hundred thousand men. It is to him that I send you. You
will hand him this letter, a copy of which I confide to each of you. It
is to tell him that I am coming at once, in two days' time, with every
man and horse and gun to his relief. I must give them forty-eight hours
to recover. Then straight to Paris! You understand me, gentlemen?'

Ah, if I could tell you the glow of pride which it gave me to be taken
into the great man's confidence in this way. As he handed our letters to
us I clicked my spurs and threw out my chest, smiling and nodding to let
him know that I saw what he would be after. He smiled also, and rested
his hand for a moment upon the cape of my dolman. I would have given
half my arrears of pay if my mother could have seen me at that instant.

'I will show you your route,' said he, turning back to the map. 'Your
orders are to ride together as far as Bazoches. You will then separate,
the one making for Paris by Oulchy and Neuilly, and the other to the
north by Braine, Soissons, and Senlis. Have you anything to say,
Brigadier Gerard?'

I am a rough soldier, but I have words and ideas. I had begun to speak
about glory and the peril of France when he cut me short.

'And you, Major Charpentier?'

'If we find our route unsafe, are we at liberty to choose another?' said
he.

'Soldiers do not choose, they obey.' He inclined his head to show that
we were dismissed, and turned round to Berthier. I do not know what he
said, but I heard them both laughing.

Well, as you may think, we lost little time in getting upon our way. In
half an hour we were riding down the High Street of Rheims, and it
struck twelve o'clock as we passed the Cathedral. I had my little grey
mare, Violette, the one which Sebastiani had wished to buy after
Dresden. It is the fastest horse in the six brigades of light cavalry,
and was only beaten by the Duke of Rovigo's racer from England. As to
Charpentier, he had the kind of horse which a horse grenadier or a
cuirassier would be likely to ride: a back like a bedstead, you
understand, and legs like the posts. He is a hulking fellow himself, so
that they looked a singular pair. And yet in his insane conceit he ogled
the girls as they waved their handkerchiefs to me from the windows, and
he twirled his ugly red moustache up into his eyes, just as if it were
to him that their attention was addressed.

When we came out of the town we passed through the French camp, and then
across the battle-field of yesterday, which was still covered both by
our own poor fellows and by the Russians. But of the two the camp was
the sadder sight. Our army was thawing away. The Guards were all right,
though the young guard was full of conscripts. The artillery and the
heavy cavalry were also good if there were more of them, but the
infantry privates with their under officers looked like schoolboys with
their masters. And we had no reserves. When one considered that there
were 80,000 Prussians to the north and 150,000 Russians and Austrians to
the south, it might make even the bravest man grave.

For my own part, I confess that I shed a tear until the thought came
that the Emperor was still with us, and that on that very morning he had
placed his hand upon my dolman and had promised me a medal of honour.
This set me singing, and I spurred Violette on, until Charpentier had to
beg me to have mercy on his great, snorting, panting camel. The road was
beaten into paste and rutted two feet deep by the artillery, so that he
was right in saying that it was not the place for a gallop.

I have never been very friendly with this Charpentier; and now for
twenty miles of the way I could not draw a word from him. He rode with
his brows puckered and his chin upon his breast, like a man who is heavy
with thought. More than once I asked him what was on his mind, thinking
that, perhaps, with my quicker intelligence I might set the matter
straight. His answer always was that it was his mission of which he was
thinking, which surprised me, because, although I had never thought much
of his intelligence, still it seemed to me to be impossible that anyone
could be puzzled by so simple and soldierly a task.

Well, we came at last to Bazoches, where he was to take the southern
road and I the northern. He half turned in his saddle before he left me,
and he looked at me with a singular expression of inquiry in his face.

'What do you make of it, Brigadier?' he asked.

'Of what?'

'Of our mission.'

'Surely it is plain enough.'

'You think so? Why should the Emperor tell us his plans?'

'Because he recognized our intelligence.'

My companion laughed in a manner which I found annoying.

'May I ask what you intend to do if you find these villages full of
Prussians?' he asked.

'I shall obey my orders.'

'But you will be killed.'

'Very possibly.'

He laughed again, and so offensively that I clapped my hand to my sword.
But before I could tell him what I thought of his stupidity and rudeness
he had wheeled his horse, and was lumbering away down the other road. I
saw his big fur cap vanish over the brow of the hill, and then I rode
upon my way, wondering at his conduct. From time to time I put my hand
to the breast of my tunic and felt the paper crackle beneath my fingers.
Ah, my precious paper, which should be turned into the little silver
medal for which I had yearned so long. All the way from Braine to
Sermoise I was thinking of what my mother would say when she saw it.

I stopped to give Violette a meal at a wayside auberge on the side of a
hill not far from Soissons--a place surrounded by old oaks, and with so
many crows that one could scarce hear one's own voice. It was from the
innkeeper that I learned that Marmont had fallen back two days before,
and that the Prussians were over the Aisne. An hour later, in the fading
light, I saw two of their vedettes upon the hill to the right, and then,
as darkness gathered, the heavens to the north were all glimmering from
the lights of a bivouac.

When I heard that Blucher had been there for two days, I was much
surprised that the Emperor should not have known that the country
through which he had ordered me to carry my precious letter was already
occupied by the enemy. Still, I thought of the tone of his voice when he
said to Charpentier that a soldier must not choose, but must obey. I
should follow the route he had laid down for me as long as Violette
could move a hoof or I a finger upon her bridle. All the way from
Sermoise to Soissons, where the road dips up and down, curving among fir
woods, I kept my pistol ready and my sword-belt braced, pushing on
swiftly where the path was straight, and then coming slowly round the
corners in the way we learned in Spain.

When I came to the farmhouse which lies to the right of the road just
after you cross the wooden bridge over the Crise, near where the great
statue of the Virgin stands, a woman cried to me from the field, saying
that the Prussians were in Soissons. A small party of their lancers, she
said, had come in that very afternoon, and a whole division was expected
before midnight. I did not wait to hear the end of her tale, but clapped
spurs into Violette, and in five minutes was galloping her into the
town.

Three Uhlans were at the mouth of the main street, their horses
tethered, and they gossiping together, each with a pipe as long as my
sabre. I saw them well in the light of an open door, but of me they
could have seen only the flash of Violette's grey side and the black
flutter of my cloak. A moment later I flew through a stream of them
rushing from an open gateway. Violette's shoulder sent one of them
reeling, and I stabbed at another but missed him. Pang, pang, went two
carbines, but I had flown round the curve of the street, and never so
much as heard the hiss of the balls. Ah, we were great, both Violette
and I. She lay down to it like a coursed hare, the fire flying from her
hoofs. I stood in my stirrups and brandished my sword. Someone sprang
for my bridle. I sliced him through the arm, and I heard him howling
behind me. Two horsemen closed upon me. I cut one down and outpaced the
other. A minute later I was clear of the town, and flying down a broad
white road with the black poplars on either side. For a time I heard the
rattle of hoofs behind me, but they died and died until I could not tell
them from the throbbing of my own heart. Soon I pulled up and listened,
but all was silent. They had given up the chase.

Well, the first thing that I did was to dismount and to lead my mare
into a small wood through which a stream ran. There I watered her and
rubbed her down, giving her two pieces of sugar soaked in cognac from my
flask. She was spent from the sharp chase, but it was wonderful to see
how she came round with a half-hour's rest. When my thighs closed upon
her again, I could tell by the spring and the swing of her that it would
not be her fault if I did not win my way safe to Paris.

I must have been well within the enemy's lines now, for I heard a number
of them shouting one of their rough drinking songs out of a house by the
roadside, and I went round by the fields to avoid it. At another time
two men came out into the moonlight (for by this time it was a cloudless
night) and shouted something in German, but I galloped on without
heeding them, and they were afraid to fire, for their own hussars are
dressed exactly as I was. It is best to take no notice at these times,
and then they put you down as a deaf man.

It was a lovely moon, and every tree threw a black bar across the road.
I could see the countryside just as if it were daytime, and very
peaceful it looked, save that there was a great fire raging somewhere in
the north. In the silence of the night-time, and with the knowledge that
danger was in front and behind me, the sight of that great distant fire
was very striking and awesome. But I am not easily clouded, for I have
seen too many singular things, so I hummed a tune between my teeth and
thought of little Lisette, whom I might see in Paris. My mind was full
of her when, trotting round a corner, I came straight upon half-a-dozen
German dragoons, who were sitting round a brushwood fire by the
roadside.

I am an excellent soldier. I do not say this because I am prejudiced in
my own favour, but because I really am so. I can weigh every chance in a
moment, and decide with as much certainty as though I had brooded for a
week. Now I saw like a flash that, come what might, I should be chased,
and on a horse which had already done a long twelve leagues. But it was
better to be chased onwards than to be chased back. On this moonlit
night, with fresh horses behind me, I must take my risk in either case;
but if I were to shake them off, I preferred that it should be near
Senlis than near Soissons.

All this flashed on me as if by instinct, you understand. My eyes had
hardly rested on the bearded faces under the brass helmets before my
rowels had touched Violette, and she was off with a rattle like a
pas-de-charge. Oh, the shouting and rushing and stamping from behind us!
Three of them fired and three swung themselves on to their horses. A
bullet rapped on the crupper of my saddle with a noise like a stick on a
door. Violette sprang madly forward, and I thought she had been wounded,
but it was only a graze above the near fore-fetlock. Ah, the dear little
mare, how I loved her when I felt her settle down into that long, easy
gallop of hers, her hoofs going like a Spanish girl's castanets. I could
not hold myself. I turned on my saddle and shouted and raved, 'Vive
l'Empereur!' I screamed and laughed at the gust of oaths that came back
to me.

But it was not over yet. If she had been fresh she might have gained a
mile in five. Now she could only hold her own with a very little over.
There was one of them, a young boy of an officer, who was better mounted
than the others. He drew ahead with every stride. Two hundred yards
behind him were two troopers, but I saw every time that I glanced round
that the distance between them was increasing. The other three who had
waited to shoot were a long way in the rear.

The officer's mount was a bay--a fine horse, though not to be spoken of
with Violette; yet it was a powerful brute, and it seemed to me that in
a few miles its freshness might tell. I waited until the lad was a long
way in front of his comrades, and then I eased my mare down a little--a
very, very little, so that he might think he was really catching me.
When he came within pistol-shot of me I drew and cocked my own pistol,
and laid my chin upon my shoulder to see what he would do. He did not
offer to fire, and I soon discerned the cause. The silly boy had taken
his pistols from his holsters when he had camped for the night. He
wagged his sword at me now and roared some threat or other. He did not
seem to understand that he was at my mercy. I eased Violette down until
there was not the length of a long lance between the grey tail and the
bay muzzle.

'Rendez-vous!' he yelled.

'I must compliment monsieur upon his French,' said I, resting the barrel
of my pistol upon my bridle-arm, which I have always found best when
shooting from the saddle. I aimed at his face, and could see, even in
the moonlight, how white he grew when he understood that it was all up
with him. But even as my finger pressed the trigger I thought of his
mother, and I put my ball through his horse's shoulder. I fear he hurt
himself in the fall, for it was a fearful crash, but I had my letter to
think of, so I stretched the mare into a gallop once more.

But they were not so easily shaken off, these brigands. The two troopers
thought no more of their young officer than if he had been a recruit
thrown in the riding-school. They left him to the others and thundered
on after me. I had pulled up on the brow of a hill, thinking that I had
heard the last of them; but, my faith, I soon saw there was no time for
loitering, so away we went, the mare tossing her head and I my shako, to
show what we thought of two dragoons who tried to catch a hussar. But at
this moment, even while I laughed at the thought, my heart stood still
within me, for there at the end of the long white road was a black patch
of cavalry waiting to receive me. To a young soldier it might have
seemed the shadow of the trees, but to me it was a troop of hussars,
and, turn where I could, death seemed to be waiting for me.

Well, I had the dragoons behind me and the hussars in front. Never since
Moscow have I seemed to be in such peril. But for the honour of the
brigade I had rather be cut down by a light cavalryman than by a heavy.
I never drew bridle, therefore, or hesitated for an instant, but I let
Violette have her head. I remember that I tried to pray as I rode, but I
am a little out of practice at such things, and the only words I could
remember were the prayer for fine weather which we used at the school on
the evening before holidays. Even this seemed better than nothing, and I
was pattering it out, when suddenly I heard French voices in front of
me. Ah, mon Dieu, but the joy went through my heart like a musket-ball.
They were ours--our own dear little rascals from the corps of Marmont.
Round whisked my two dragoons and galloped for their lives, with the
moon gleaming on their brass helmets, while I trotted up to my friends
with no undue haste, for I would have them understand that though a
hussar may fly, it is not in his nature to fly very fast. Yet I fear
that Violette's heaving flanks and foam-spattered muzzle gave the lie
to my careless bearing.

Who should be at the head of the troop but old Bouvet, whom I saved at
Leipzig! When he saw me his little pink eyes filled with tears, and,
indeed, I could not but shed a few myself at the sight of his joy. I
told him of my mission, but he laughed when I said that I must pass
through Senlis.

'The enemy is there,' said he. 'You cannot go.'

'I prefer to go where the enemy is,' I answered.

'But why not go straight to Paris with your despatch? Why should you
choose to pass through the one place where you are almost sure to be
taken or killed?'

'A soldier does not choose--he obeys,' said I, just as I had heard
Napoleon say it.

Old Bouvet laughed in his wheezy way, until I had to give my moustachios
a twirl and look him up and down in a manner which brought him to
reason.

'Well', said he, 'you had best come along with us, for we are all bound
for Senlis. Our orders are to reconnoitre the place. A squadron of
Poniatowski's Polish Lancers are in front of us. If you must ride
through it, it is possible that we may be able to go with you.'

So away we went, jingling and clanking through the quiet night until we
came up with the Poles--fine old soldiers all of them, though a trifle
heavy for their horses. It was a treat to see them, for they could not
have carried themselves better if they had belonged to my own brigade.
We rode together, until in the early morning we saw the lights of
Senlis. A peasant was coming along with a cart, and from him we learned
how things were going there.

His information was certain, for his brother was the Mayor's coachman,
and he had spoken with him late the night before. There was a single
squadron of Cossacks--or a polk, as they call it in their frightful
language--quartered upon the Mayor's house, which stands at the corner
of the market-place, and is the largest building in the town. A whole
division of Prussion infantry was encamped in the woods to the north,
but only the Cossacks were in Senlis. Ah, what a chance to avenge
ourselves upon these barbarians, whose cruelty to our poor countryfolk
was the talk at every camp fire.

We were into the town like a torrent, hacked down the vedettes, rode
over the guard, and were smashing in the doors of the Mayor's house
before they understood that there was a Frenchman within twenty miles of
them. We saw horrid heads at the windows--heads bearded to the temples,
with tangled hair and sheepskin caps, and silly, gaping mouths. 'Hourra!
Hourra!' they shrieked, and fired with their carbines, but our fellows
were into the house and at their throats before they had wiped the sleep
out of their eyes. It was dreadful to see how the Poles flung themselves
upon them, like starving wolves upon a herd of fat bucks--for, as you
know, the Poles have a blood feud against the Cossacks. The most were
killed in the upper rooms, whither they had fled for shelter, and the
blood was pouring down into the hall like rain from a roof. They are
terrible soldiers, these Poles, though I think they are a trifle heavy
for their horses. Man for man, they are as big as Kellerman's
cuirassiers. Their equipment is, of course, much lighter, since they are
without the cuirass, back-plate, and helmet.

Well, it was at this point that I made an error--a very serious error it
must be admitted. Up to this moment I had carried out my mission in a
manner which only my modesty prevents me from describing as remarkable.
But now I did that which an official would condemn and a soldier excuse.

There is no doubt that the mare was spent, but still it is true that I
might have galloped on through Senlis and reached the country, where I
should have had no enemy between me and Paris. But what hussar can ride
past a fight and never draw rein? It is to ask too much of him.
Besides, I thought that if Violette had an hour of rest I might have
three hours the better at the other end. Then on the top of it came
those heads at the windows, with their sheepskin hats and their
barbarous cries. I sprang from my saddle, threw Violette's bridle over a
rail-post, and ran into the house with the rest. It is true that I was
too late to be of service, and that I was nearly wounded by a
lance-thrust from one of these dying savages. Still, it is a pity to
miss even the smallest affair, for one never knows what opportunity for
advancement may present itself. I have seen more soldierly work in
outpost skirmishes and little gallop-and-hack affairs of the kind than
in any of the Emperor's big battles.

When the house was cleared I took a bucket of water out for Violette,
and our peasant guide showed me where the good Mayor kept his fodder. My
faith, but the little sweetheart was ready for it. Then I sponged down
her legs, and leaving her still tethered I went back into the house to
find a mouthful for myself, so that I should not need to halt again
until I was in Paris.

And now I come to the part of my story which may seem singular to you,
although I could tell you at least ten things every bit as queer which
have happened to me in my lifetime. You can understand that, to a man
who spends his life in scouting and vedette duties on the bloody ground
which lies between two great armies, there are many chances of strange
experiences. I'll tell you, however, exactly what occurred.

Old Bouvet was waiting in the passage when I entered, and he asked me
whether we might not crack a bottle of wine together. 'My faith, we must
not be long,' said he. 'There are ten thousand of Theilmann's Prussians
in the woods up yonder.'

'Where is the wine?' I asked.

'Ah, you may trust two hussars to find where the wine is,' said he, and
taking a candle in his hand, he led the way down the stone stairs into
the kitchen.

When we got there we found another door, which opened on to a winding
stair with the cellar at the bottom. The Cossacks had been there before
us, as was easily seen by the broken bottles littered all over it.
However, the Mayor was a _bon-vivant_, and I do not wish to have a
better set of bins to pick from. Chambertin, Graves, Alicant, white wine
and red, sparkling and still, they lay in pyramids peeping coyly out of
sawdust. Old Bouvet stood with his candle looking here and peeping
there, purring in his throat like a cat before a milk-pail. He had
picked upon a Burgundy at last, and had his hand outstretched to the
bottle when there came a roar of musketry from above us, a rush of feet,
and such a yelping and screaming as I have never listened to. The
Prussians were upon us!

Bouvet is a brave man: I will say that for him. He flashed out his sword
and away he clattered up the stone steps, his spurs clinking as he ran.
I followed him, but just as we came out into the kitchen passage a
tremendous shout told us that the house had been recaptured.

'It is all over,' I cried, grasping at Bouvet's sleeve.

'There is one more to die,' he shouted, and away he went like a madman
up the second stair. In effect, I should have gone to my death also had
I been in his place, for he had done very wrong in not throwing out his
scouts to warn him if the Germans advanced upon him. For an instant I
was about to rush up with him, and then I bethought myself that, after
all, I had my own mission to think of, and that if I were taken the
important letter of the Emperor would be sacrificed. I let Bouvet die
alone, therefore, and I went down into the cellar again, closing the
door behind me.

Well, it was not a very rosy prospect down there either. Bouvet had
dropped the candle when the alarm came, and I, pawing about in the
darkness, could find nothing but broken bottles. At last I came upon
the candle, which had rolled under the curve of a cask, but, try as I
would with my tinderbox, I could not light it. The reason was that the
wick had been wet in a puddle of wine, so suspecting that this might be
the case, I cut the end off with my sword. Then I found that it lighted
easily enough. But what to do I could not imagine. The scoundrels
upstairs were shouting themselves hoarse, several hundred of them from
the sound, and it was clear that some of them would soon want to moisten
their throats. There would be an end to a dashing soldier, and of the
mission and of the medal. I thought of my mother and I thought of the
Emperor. It made me weep to think that the one would lose so excellent a
son and the other the best light cavalry officer he ever had since
Lasalle's time. But presently I dashed the tears from my eyes.
'Courage!' I cried, striking myself upon the chest. 'Courage, my brave
boy. Is it possible that one who has come safely from Moscow without so
much as a frost-bite will die in a French wine-cellar?' At the thought I
was up on my feet and clutching at the letter in my tunic, for the
crackle of it gave me courage.

My first plan was to set fire to the house, in the hope of escaping in
the confusion. My second to get into an empty wine-cask. I was looking
round to see if I could find one, when suddenly, in the corner, I espied
a little low door, painted of the same grey colour as the wall, so that
it was only a man with quick sight who would have noticed it. I pushed
against it, and at first I imagined that it was locked. Presently,
however, it gave a little, and then I understood that it was held by the
pressure of something on the other side. I put my feet against a
hogshead of wine, and I gave such a push that the door flew open and I
came down with a crash upon my back, the candle flying out of my hands,
so that I found myself in darkness once more. I picked myself up and
stared through the black archway into the gloom beyond.

There was a slight ray of light coming from some slit or grating. The
dawn had broken outside, and I could dimly see the long, curving sides
of several huge casks, which made me think that perhaps this was where
the Mayor kept his reserves of wine while they were maturing. At any
rate, it seemed to be a safer hiding-place than the outer cellar, so
gathering up my candle, I was just closing the door behind me, when I
suddenly saw something which filled me with amazement, and even, I
confess, with the smallest little touch of fear.

I have said that at the further end of the cellar there was a dim grey
fan of light striking downwards from somewhere near the roof. Well, as I
peered through the darkness, I suddenly saw a great, tall man skip into
this belt of daylight, and then out again into the darkness at the
further end. My word, I gave such a start that my shako nearly broke its
chin-strap! It was only a glance, but, none the less, I had time to see
that the fellow had a hairy Cossack cap on his head, and that he was a
great, long-legged, broad-shouldered brigand, with a sabre at his waist.
My faith, even Etienne Gerard was a little staggered at being left alone
with such a creature in the dark.

But only for a moment. 'Courage!' I thought. 'Am I not a hussar, a
brigadier, too, at the age of thirty-one, and the chosen messenger of
the Emperor?' After all, this skulker had more cause to be afraid of me
than I of him. And then suddenly I understood that he was
afraid--horribly afraid. I could read it from his quick step and his
bent shoulders as he ran among the barrels, like a rat making for its
hole. And, of course, it must have been he who had held the door against
me, and not some packing-case or wine-cask as I had imagined. He was the
pursued then, and I the pursuer. Aha, I felt my whiskers bristle as I
advanced upon him through the darkness! He would find that he had no
chicken to deal with, this robber from the North. For the moment I was
magnificent.

At first I had feared to light my candle lest I should make a mark of
myself, but now, after cracking my shin over a box, and catching my
spurs in some canvas, I thought the bolder course the wiser. I lit it,
therefore, and then I advanced with long strides, my sword in my hand.
'Come out, you rascal!' I cried. 'Nothing can save you. You will at last
meet with your deserts.'

I held my candle high, and presently I caught a glimpse of the man's
head staring at me over a barrel. He had a gold chevron on his black
cap, and the expression of his face told me in an instant that he was an
officer and a man of refinement.

'Monsieur,' he cried, in excellent French, 'I surrender myself on a
promise of quarter. But if I do not have your promise, I will then sell
my life as dearly as I can.'

'Sir,' said I, 'a Frenchman knows how to treat an unfortunate enemy.
Your life is safe.' With that he handed his sword over the top of the
barrel, and I bowed with the candle on my heart. 'Whom have I the honour
of capturing?' I asked.

'I am the Count Boutkine, of the Emperor's own Don Cossacks,' said he.
'I came out with my troop to reconnoitre Senlis, and as we found no sign
of your people we determined to spend the night here.'

'And would it be an indiscretion,' I asked, 'if I were to inquire how
you came into the back cellar?'

'Nothing more simple,' said he. 'It was our intention to start at early
dawn. Feeling chilled after dressing, I thought that a cup of wine would
do me no harm, so I came down to see what I could find. As I was
rummaging about, the house was suddenly carried by assault so rapidly
that by the time I had climbed the stairs it was all over. It only
remained for me to save myself, so I came down here and hid myself in
the back cellar, where you have found me.'

I thought of how old Bouvet had behaved under the same conditions, and
the tears sprang to my eyes as I contemplated the glory of France. Then
I had to consider what I should do next. It was clear that this Russian
Count, being in the back cellar while we were in the front one, had not
heard the sounds which would have told him that the house was once again
in the hands of his own allies. If he should once understand this the
tables would be turned, and I should be his prisoner instead of he being
mine. What was I to do? I was at my wits' end, when suddenly there came
to me an idea so brilliant that I could not but be amazed at my own
invention.

'Count Boutkine,' said I, 'I find myself in a most difficult position.'

'And why?' he asked.

'Because I have promised you your life.'

His jaw dropped a little.

'You would not withdraw your promise?' he cried.

'If the worst comes to the worst I can die in your defence,' said I;
'but the difficulties are great.'

'What is it, then?' he asked.

'I will be frank with you,' said I. 'You must know that our fellows, and
especially the Poles, are so incensed against the Cossacks that the mere
sight of the uniform drives them mad. They precipitate themselves
instantly upon the wearer and tear him limb from limb. Even their
officers cannot restrain them.'

The Russian grew pale at my words and the way in which I said them.

'But this is terrible,' said he.

'Horrible!' said I. 'If we were to go up together at this moment I
cannot promise how far I could protect you.'

'I am in your hands,' he cried. 'What would you suggest that we should
do? Would it not be best that I should remain here?'

'That worst of all.'

'And why?'

'Because our fellows will ransack the house presently, and then you
would be cut to pieces. No, no, I must go and break it to them. But even
then, when once they see that accursed uniform, I do not know what may
happen.'

'Should I then take the uniform off?'

'Excellent!' I cried. 'Hold, we have it! You will take your uniform off
and put on mine. That will make you sacred to every French soldier.'

'It is not the French I fear so much as the Poles.'

'But my uniform will be a safeguard against either.'

'How can I thank you?' he cried. 'But you--what are you to wear?'

'I will wear yours.'

'And perhaps fall a victim to your generosity?'

'It is my duty to take the risk,' I answered; 'but I have no fears. I
will ascend in your uniform. A hundred swords will be turned upon me.
"Hold!" I will shout, "I am the Brigadier Gerard!" Then they will see my
face. They will know me. And I will tell them about you. Under the
shield of these clothes you will be sacred.'

His fingers trembled with eagerness as he tore off his tunic. His boots
and breeches were much like my own, so there was no need to change them,
but I gave him my hussar jacket, my dolman, my shako, my sword-belt, and
my sabre-tasche, while I took in exchange his high sheepskin cap with
the gold chevron, his fur-trimmed coat, and his crooked sword. Be it
well understood that in changing the tunics I did not forget to change
my thrice-precious letter also from my old one to my new.

'With your leave,' said I, 'I shall now bind you to a barrel.'

He made a great fuss over this, but I have learned in my soldiering
never to throw away chances, and how could I tell that he might not,
when my back was turned, see how the matter really stood, and break in
upon my plans? He was leaning against a barrel at the time, so I ran six
times round it with a rope, and then tied it with a big knot behind. If
he wished to come upstairs he would, at least, have to carry a thousand
litres of good French wine for a knapsack. I then shut the door of the
back cellar behind me, so that he might not hear what was going forward,
and tossing the candle away I ascended the kitchen stair.

There were only about twenty steps, and yet, while I came up them, I
seemed to have time to think of everything that I had ever hoped to do.
It was the same feeling that I had at Eylau when I lay with my broken
leg and saw the horse artillery galloping down upon me. Of course, I
knew that if I were taken I should be shot instantly as being disguised
within the enemy's lines. Still, it was a glorious death--in the direct
service of the Emperor--and I reflected that there could not be less
than five lines, and perhaps seven, in the _Moniteur_ about me. Palaret
had eight lines, and I am sure that he had not so fine a career.

When I made my way out into the hall, with all the nonchalance in my
face and manner that I could assume, the very first thing that I saw was
Bouvet's dead body, with his legs drawn up and a broken sword in his
hand. I could see by the black smudge that he had been shot at close
quarters. I should have wished to salute as I went by, for he was a
gallant man, but I feared lest I should be seen, and so I passed on.

The front of the hall was full of Prussian infantry, who were knocking
loopholes in the wall, as though they expected that there might be yet
another attack. Their officer, a little man, was running about giving
directions. They were all too busy to take much notice of me, but
another officer, who was standing by the door with a long pipe in his
mouth, strode across and clapped me on the shoulder, pointing to the
dead bodies of our poor hussars, and saying something which was meant
for a jest, for his long beard opened and showed every fang in his head.
I laughed heartily also, and said the only Russian words that I knew. I
learned them from little Sophie, at Wilna, and they meant: 'If the night
is fine we shall meet under the oak tree, but if it rains we shall meet
in the byre.' It was all the same to this German, however, and I have no
doubt that he gave me credit for saying something very witty indeed, for
he roared laughing, and slapped me on my shoulder again. I nodded to him
and marched out of the hall-door as coolly as if I were the commandant
of the garrison.

There were a hundred horses tethered about outside, most of them
belonging to the Poles and hussars. Good little Violette was waiting
with the others, and she whinnied when she saw me coming towards her.
But I would not mount her. No. I was much too cunning for that. On the
contrary, I chose the most shaggy little Cossack horse that I could see,
and I sprang upon it with as much assurance as though it had belonged to
my father before me. It had a great bag of plunder slung over its neck,
and this I laid upon Violette's back, and led her along beside me. Never
have you seen such a picture of the Cossack returning from the foray. It
was superb.

Well, the town was full of Prussians by this time. They lined the
side-walks and pointed me out to each other, saying, as I could judge
from their gestures, 'There goes one of those devils of Cossacks. They
are the boys for foraging and plunder.'

One or two officers spoke to me with an air of authority, but I shook my
head and smiled, and said, 'If the night is fine we shall meet under the
oak tree, but if it rains we shall meet in the byre,' at which they
shrugged their shoulders and gave the matter up. In this way I worked
along until I was beyond the northern outskirt of the town. I could see
in the roadway two lancer vedettes with their black and white pennons,
and I knew that when I was once past these I should be a free man once
more. I made my pony trot, therefore, Violette rubbing her nose against
my knee all the time, and looking up at me to ask how she had deserved
that this hairy doormat of a creature should be preferred to her. I was
not more than a hundred yards from the Uhlans when, suddenly, you can
imagine my feelings when I saw a real Cossack coming galloping along the
road towards me.

Ah, my friend, you who read this, if you have any heart, you will feel
for a man like me, who had gone through so many dangers and trials, only
at this very last moment to be confronted with one which appeared to put
an end to everything. I will confess that for a moment I lost heart, and
was inclined to throw myself down in my despair, and to cry out that I
had been betrayed. But, no; I was not beaten even now. I opened two
buttons of my tunic so that I might get easily at the Emperor's message,
for it was my fixed determination when all hope was gone to swallow the
letter and then die sword in hand. Then I felt that my little, crooked
sword was loose in its sheath, and I trotted on to where the vedettes
were waiting. They seemed inclined to stop me, but I pointed to the
other Cossack, who was still a couple of hundred yards off, and they,
understanding that I merely wished to meet him, let me pass with a
salute.

I dug my spurs into my pony then, for if I were only far enough from the
lancers I thought I might manage the Cossack without much difficulty. He
was an officer, a large, bearded man, with a gold chevron in his cap,
just the same as mine. As I advanced he unconsciously aided me by
pulling up his horse, so that I had a fine start of the vedettes. On I
came for him, and I could see wonder changing to suspicion in his brown
eyes as he looked at me and at my pony, and at my equipment. I do not
know what it was that was wrong, but he saw something which was as it
should not be. He shouted out a question, and then when I gave no answer
he pulled out his sword. I was glad in my heart to see him do so, for I
had always rather fight than cut down an unsuspecting enemy. Now I made
at him full tilt, and, parrying his cut, I got my point in just under
the fourth button of his tunic. Down he went, and the weight of him
nearly took me off my horse before I could disengage. I never glanced at
him to see if he were living or dead, for I sprang off my pony and on to
Violette, with a shake of my bridle and a kiss of my hand to the two
Uhlans behind me. They galloped after me, shouting, but Violette had had
her rest, and was just as fresh as when she started. I took the first
side road to the west and then the first to the south, which would take
me away from the enemy's country. On we went and on, every stride taking
me further from my foes and nearer to my friends. At last, when I
reached the end of a long stretch of road, and looking back from it
could see no sign of any pursuers, I understood that my troubles were
over.

And it gave me a glow of happiness, as I rode, to think that I had done
to the letter what the Emperor had ordered. What would he say when he
saw me? What could he say which would do justice to the incredible way
in which I had risen above every danger? He had ordered me to go through
Sermoise, Soissons, and Senlis, little dreaming that they were all three
occupied by the enemy. And yet I had done it. I had borne his letter in
safety through each of these towns. Hussars, dragoons, lancers,
Cossacks, and infantry--I had run the gauntlet of all of them, and had
come out unharmed.

When I had got as far as Dammartin I caught a first glimpse of our own
outposts. There was a troop of dragoons in a field, and of course I
could see from the horsehair crests that they were French. I galloped
towards them in order to ask them if all was safe between there and
Paris, and as I rode I felt such a pride at having won my way back to my
friends again, that I could not refrain from waving my sword in the air.

At this a young officer galloped out from among the dragoons, also
brandishing his sword, and it warmed my heart to think that he should
come riding with such ardour and enthusiasm to greet me. I made
Violette caracole, and as we came together I brandished my sword more
gallantly than ever, but you can imagine my feelings when he suddenly
made a cut at me which would certainly have taken my head off if I had
not fallen forward with my nose in Violette's mane. My faith, it
whistled just over my cap like an east wind. Of course, it came from
this accursed Cossack uniform which, in my excitement, I had forgotten
all about, and this young dragoon had imagined that I was some Russian
champion who was challenging the French cavalry. My word, he was a
frightened man when he understood how near he had been to killing the
celebrated Brigadier Gerard.

Well, the road was clear, and about three o'clock in the afternoon I was
at St Denis, though it took me a long two hours to get from there to
Paris, for the road was blocked with commissariat waggons and guns of
the artillery reserve, which was going north to Marmont and Mortier. You
cannot conceive the excitement which my appearance in such a costume
made in Paris, and when I came to the Rue de Rivoli I should think I had
a quarter of a mile of folk riding or running behind me. Word had got
about from the dragoons (two of whom had come with me), and everybody
knew about my adventures and how I had come by my uniform. It was a
triumph--men shouting and women waving their handkerchiefs and blowing
kisses from the windows.

Although I am a man singularly free from conceit, still I must confess
that, on this one occasion, I could not restrain myself from showing
that this reception gratified me. The Russian's coat had hung very loose
upon me, but now I threw out my chest until it was as tight as a
sausage-skin. And my little sweetheart of a mare tossed her mane and
pawed with her front hoofs, frisking her tail about as though she said,
'We've done it together this time. It is to us that commissions should
be intrusted.' When I kissed her between the nostrils as I dismounted at
the gate of the Tuileries, there was as much shouting as if a bulletin
had been read from the Grand Army.

I was hardly in costume to visit a King; but, after all, if one has a
soldierly figure one can do without all that. I was shown up straight
away to Joseph, whom I had often seen in Spain. He seemed as stout, as
quiet, and as amiable as ever. Talleyrand was in the room with him, or I
suppose I should call him the Duke of Benevento, but I confess that I
like old names best. He read my letter when Joseph Buonaparte handed it
to him, and then he looked at me with the strangest expression in those
funny little, twinkling eyes of his.

'Were you the only messenger?' he asked.

'There was one other, sir,' said I. 'Major Charpentier, of the Horse
Grenadiers.'

'He has not yet arrived,' said the King of Spain.

'If you had seen the legs of his horse, sire, you would not wonder at
it,' I remarked.

'There may be other reasons,' said Talleyrand, and he gave that singular
smile of his.

Well, they paid me a compliment or two, though they might have said a
good deal more and yet have said too little. I bowed myself out, and
very glad I was to get away, for I hate a Court as much as I love a
camp. Away I went to my old friend Chaubert, in the Rue Miromesnil, and
there I got his hussar uniform, which fitted me very well. He and
Lisette and I supped together in his rooms, and all my dangers were
forgotten. In the morning I found Violette ready for another
twenty-league stretch. It was my intention to return instantly to the
Emperor's headquarters, for I was, as you may well imagine, impatient to
hear his words of praise, and to receive my reward.

I need not say that I rode back by a safe route, for I had seen quite
enough of Uhlans and Cossacks. I passed through Meaux and Château
Thierry, and so in the evening I arrived at Rheims, where Napoleon was
still lying. The bodies of our fellows and of St Prest's Russians had
all been buried, and I could see changes in the camp also. The soldiers
looked better cared for; some of the cavalry had received remounts, and
everything was in excellent order. It was wonderful what a good general
can effect in a couple of days.

When I came to the headquarters I was shown straight into the Emperor's
room. He was drinking coffee at a writing-table, with a big plan drawn
out on paper in front of him. Berthier and Macdonald were leaning, one
over each shoulder, and he was talking so quickly that I don't believe
that either of them could catch a half of what he was saying. But when
his eyes fell upon me he dropped the pen on to the chart, and he sprang
up with a look in his pale face which struck me cold.

'What the deuce are you doing here?' he shouted. When he was angry he
had a voice like a peacock.

'I have the honour to report to you, sire,' said I, 'that I have
delivered your despatch safely to the King of Spain.'

'What!' he yelled, and his two eyes transfixed me like bayonets. Oh,
those dreadful eyes, shifting from grey to blue, like steel in the
sunshine. I can see them now when I have a bad dream.

'What has become of Charpentier?' he asked.

'He is captured,' said Macdonald.

'By whom?'

'The Russians.'

'The Cossacks?'

'No, a single Cossack.'

'He gave himself up?'

'Without resistance.'

'He is an intelligent officer. You will see that the medal of honour is
awarded to him.'

When I heard those words I had to rub my eyes to make sure that I was
awake.

'As to you,' cried the Emperor, taking a step forward as if he would
have struck me, 'you brain of a hare, what do you think that you were
sent upon this mission for? Do you conceive that I would send a really
important message by such a hand as yours, and through every village
which the enemy holds? How you came through them passes my
comprehension; but if your fellow-messenger had had but as little sense
as you, my whole plan of campaign would have been ruined. Can you not
see, coglione, that this message contained false news, and that it was
intended to deceive the enemy whilst I put a very different scheme into
execution?'

When I heard those cruel words and saw the angry, white face which
glared at me, I had to hold the back of a chair, for my mind was failing
me and my knees would hardly bear me up. But then I took courage as I
reflected that I was an honourable gentleman, and that my whole life had
been spent in toiling for this man and for my beloved country.

'Sire,' said I, and the tears would trickle down my cheeks whilst I
spoke, 'when you are dealing with a man like me you would find it wiser
to deal openly. Had I known that you had wished the despatch to fall
into the hands of the enemy, I would have seen that it came there. As I
believed that I was to guard it, I was prepared to sacrifice my life for
it. I do not believe, sire, that any man in the world ever met with more
toils and perils than I have done in trying to carry out what I thought
was your will.'

I dashed the tears from my eyes as I spoke, and with such fire and
spirit as I could command I gave him an account of it all, of my dash
through Soissons, my brush with the dragoons, my adventure in Senlis, my
rencontre with Count Boutkine in the cellar, my disguise, my meeting
with the Cossack officer, my flight, and how at the last moment I was
nearly cut down by a French dragoon. The Emperor, Berthier, and
Macdonald listened with astonishment on their faces. When I had finished
Napoleon stepped forward and he pinched me by the ear.

'There, there!' said he. 'Forget anything which I may have said. I
would have done better to trust you. You may go.'

I turned to the door, and my hand was upon the handle, when the Emperor
called upon me to stop.

'You will see,' said he, turning to the Duke of Tarentum, 'that
Brigadier Gerard has the special medal of honour, for I believe that if
he has the thickest head he has also the stoutest heart in my army.'




8. HOW THE BRIGADIER WAS TEMPTED BY THE DEVIL


The spring is at hand, my friends. I can see the little green
spear-heads breaking out once more upon the chestnut trees, and the cafe
tables have all been moved into the sunshine. It is more pleasant to sit
there, and yet I do not wish to tell my little stories to the whole
town. You have heard my doings as a lieutenant, as a squadron officer,
as a colonel, as the chief of a brigade. But now I suddenly become
something higher and more important. I become history.

If you have read of those closing years of the life of the Emperor which
were spent in the Island of St Helena, you will remember that, again and
again, he implored permission to send out one single letter which should
be unopened by those who held him. Many times he made this request, and
even went so far as to promise that he would provide for his own wants
and cease to be an expense to the British Government if it were granted
to him. But his guardians knew that he was a terrible man, this pale,
fat gentleman in the straw hat, and they dared not grant him what he
asked. Many have wondered who it was to whom he could have had anything
so secret to say. Some have supposed that it was to his wife, and some
that it was to his father-in-law; some that it was to the Emperor
Alexander, and some to Marshal Soult. What will you think of me, my
friends, when I tell you it was to me--to me, the Brigadier Gerard--that
the Emperor wished to write? Yes, humble as you see me, with only my 100
francs a month of half-pay between me and hunger, it is none the less
true that I was always in the Emperor's mind, and that he would have
given his left hand for five minutes' talk with me. I will tell you
tonight how this came about.

It was after the Battle of Fére-Champenoise where the conscripts in
their blouses and their sabots made such a fine stand, that we, the more
long-headed of us, began to understand that it was all over with us. Our
reserve ammunition had been taken in the battle, and we were left with
silent guns and empty caissons. Our cavalry, too, was in a deplorable
condition, and my own brigade had been destroyed in the charge at
Craonne. Then came the news that the enemy had taken Paris, that the
citizens had mounted the white cockade; and finally, most terrible of
all, that Marmont and his corps had gone over to the Bourbons. We looked
at each other and asked how many more of our generals were going to turn
against us. Already there were Jourdan, Marmont, Murat, Bernadotte, and
Jomini--though nobody minded much about Jomini, for his pen was always
sharper than his sword. We had been ready to fight Europe, but it looked
now as though we were to fight Europe and half of France as well.

We had come to Fontainebleau by a long, forced march, and there we were
assembled, the poor remnants of us, the corps of Ney, the corps of my
cousin Gerard, and the corps of Macdonald: twenty-five thousand in all,
with seven thousand of the guard. But we had our prestige, which was
worth fifty thousand, and our Emperor, who was worth fifty thousand
more. He was always among us, serene, smiling, confident, taking his
snuff and playing with his little riding-whip. Never in the days of his
greatest victories have I admired him as much as I did during the
Campaign of France.

One evening I was with a few of my officers, drinking a glass of wine of
Suresnes. I mention that it was wine of Suresnes just to show you that
times were not very good with us. Suddenly I was disturbed by a message
from Berthier that he wished to see me. When I speak of my old
comrades-in-arms, I will, with your permission, leave out all the fine
foreign titles which they had picked up during the wars. They are
excellent for a Court, but you never heard them in the camp, for we
could not afford to do away with our Ney, our Rapp, or our Soult--names
which were as stirring to our ears as the blare of our trumpets blowing
the reveille. It was Berthier, then, who sent to say that he wished to
see me.

He had a suite of rooms at the end of the gallery of Francis the First,
not very far from those of the Emperor. In the ante-chamber were waiting
two men whom I knew well: Colonel Despienne, of the 57th of the line,
and Captain Tremeau, of the Voltigeurs. They were both old
soldiers--Tremeau had carried a musket in Egypt--and they were also both
famous in the army for their courage and their skill with weapons.
Tremeau had become a little stiff in the wrist, but Despienne was
capable at his best of making me exert myself. He was a tiny fellow,
about three inches short of the proper height for a man--he was exactly
three inches shorter than myself--but both with the sabre and with the
small-sword he had several times almost held his own against me when we
used to exhibit at Verron's Hall of Arms in the Palais Royal. You may
think that it made us sniff something in the wind when we found three
such men called together into one room. You cannot see the lettuce and
dressing without suspecting a salad.

'Name of a pipe!' said Tremeau, in his barrack-room fashion. 'Are we
then expecting three champions of the Bourbons?'

To all of us the idea appeared not improbable. Certainly in the whole
army we were the very three who might have been chosen to meet them.

'The Prince of Neufchâtel desires to speak with the Brigadier Gerard,'
said a footman, appearing at the door.

In I went, leaving my two companions consumed with impatience behind me.
It was a small room, but very gorgeously furnished. Berthier was seated
opposite to me at a little table, with a pen in his hand and a note-book
open before him. He was looking weary and slovenly--very different from
that Berthier who used to give the fashion to the army, and who had so
often set us poorer officers tearing our hair by trimming his pelisse
with fur one campaign, and with grey astrakhan the next. On his
clean-shaven, comely face there was an expression of trouble, and he
looked at me as I entered his chamber in a way which had in it something
furtive and displeasing.

'Chief of Brigade Gerard!' said he.

'At your service, your Highness!' I answered.

'I must ask you, before I go further, to promise me, upon your honour as
a gentleman and a soldier, that what is about to pass between us shall
never be mentioned to any third person.'

My word, this was a fine beginning! I had no choice but to give the
promise required.

'You must know, then, that it is all over with the Emperor,' said he,
looking down at the table and speaking very slowly, as if he had a hard
task in getting out the words. 'Jourdan at Rouen and Marmont at Paris
have both mounted the white cockade, and it is rumoured that Talleyrand
has talked Ney into doing the same. It is evident that further
resistance is useless, and that it can only bring misery upon our
country. I wish to ask you, therefore, whether you are prepared to join
me in laying hands upon the Emperor's person, and bringing the war to a
conclusion by delivering him over to the allies?'

I assure you that when I heard this infamous proposition put forward by
the man who had been the earliest friend of the Emperor, and who had
received greater favours from him than any of his followers, I could
only stand and stare at him in amazement. For his part he tapped his
pen-handle against his teeth, and looked at me with a slanting head.

'Well?' he asked.

'I am a little deaf on one side,' said I, coldly. 'There are some
things which I cannot hear. I beg that you will permit me to return to
my duties.'

'Nay, but you must not be headstrong,' rising up and laying his hand
upon my shoulder. 'You are aware that the Senate has declared against
Napoleon, and that the Emperor Alexander refuses to treat with him.'

'Sir,' I cried, with passion, 'I would have you know that I do not care
the dregs of a wine-glass for the Senate or for the Emperor Alexander
either.'

'Then for what do you care?'

'For my own honour and for the service of my glorious master, the
Emperor Napoleon.'

'That is all very well,' said Berthier, peevishly, shrugging his
shoulders. 'Facts are facts, and as men of the world, we must look them
in the face. Are we to stand against the will of the nation? Are we to
have civil war on the top of all our misfortunes? And, besides, we are
thinning away. Every hour comes the news of fresh desertions. We have
still time to make our peace, and, indeed, to earn the highest regard,
by giving up the Emperor.'

I shook so with passion that my sabre clattered against my thigh.

'Sir,' I cried, 'I never thought to have seen the day when a Marshal of
France would have so far degraded himself as to put forward such a
proposal. I leave you to your own conscience; but as for me, until I
have the Emperor's own order, there shall always be the sword of Etienne
Gerard between his enemies and himself.'

I was so moved by my own words and by the fine position which I had
taken up, that my voice broke, and I could hardly refrain from tears. I
should have liked the whole army to have seen me as I stood with my head
so proudly erect and my hand upon my heart proclaiming my devotion to
the Emperor in his adversity. It was one of the supreme moments of my
life.

'Very good,' said Berthier, ringing a bell for the lackey. 'You will
show the Chief of Brigade Gerard into the salon.'

The footman led me into an inner room, where he desired me to be seated.
For my own part, my only desire was to get away, and I could not
understand why they should wish to detain me. When one has had no change
of uniform during a whole winter's campaign, one does not feel at home
in a palace.

I had been there about a quarter of an hour when the footman opened the
door again, and in came Colonel Despienne. Good heavens, what a sight he
was! His face was as white as a guardsman's gaiters, his eyes
projecting, the veins swollen upon his forehead, and every hair of his
moustache bristling like those of an angry cat. He was too angry to
speak, and could only shake his hands at the ceiling and make a gurgling
in his throat. 'Parricide! Viper!' those were the words that I could
catch as he stamped up and down the room.

Of course it was evident to me that he had been subjected to the same
infamous proposals as I had, and that he had received them in the same
spirit. His lips were sealed to me, as mine were to him, by the promise
which we had taken, but I contented myself with muttering 'Atrocious!
Unspeakable!'--so that he might know that I was in agreement with him.

Well, we were still there, he striding furiously up and down, and I
seated in the corner, when suddenly a most extraordinary uproar broke
out in the room which we had just quitted. There was a snarling,
worrying growl, like that of a fierce dog which has got his grip. Then
came a crash and a voice calling for help. In we rushed, the two of us,
and, my faith, we were none too soon.

Old Tremeau and Berthier were rolling together upon the floor, with the
table upon the top of them. The Captain had one of his great, skinny
yellow hands upon the Marshal's throat, and already his face was
lead-coloured, and his eyes were starting from their sockets. As to
Tremeau, he was beside himself, with foam upon the corners of his lips,
and such a frantic expression upon him that I am convinced, had we not
loosened his iron grip, finger by finger, that it would never have
relaxed while the Marshal lived. His nails were white with the power of
his grasp.

'I have been tempted by the devil!' he cried, as he staggered to his
feet. 'Yes, I have been tempted by the devil!'

As to Berthier, he could only lean against the wall, and pant for a
couple of minutes, putting his hands up to his throat and rolling his
head about. Then, with an angry gesture, he turned to the heavy blue
curtain which hung behind his chair.

The curtain was torn to one side and the Emperor stepped out into the
room. We sprang to the salute, we three old soldiers, but it was all
like a scene in a dream to us, and our eyes were as far out as
Berthier's had been. Napoleon was dressed in his green-coated chasseur
uniform, and he held his little, silver-headed switch in his hand. He
looked at us each in turn, with a smile upon his face--that frightful
smile in which neither eyes nor brow joined--and each in turn had, I
believe, a pringling on his skin, for that was the effect which the
Emperor's gaze had upon most of us. Then he walked across to Berthier
and put his hand upon his shoulder.

'You must not quarrel with blows, my dear Prince,' said he; 'they are
your title to nobility.' He spoke in that soft, caressing manner which
he could assume. There was no one who could make the French tongue sound
so pretty as the Emperor, and no one who could make it more harsh and
terrible.

'I believe he would have killed me,' cried Berthier, still rolling his
head about.

'Tut, tut! I should have come to your help had these officers not heard
your cries. But I trust that you are not really hurt!' He spoke with
earnestness, for he was in truth very fond of Berthier--more so than of
any man, unless it were of poor Duroc.

Berthier laughed, though not with a very good grace.

'It is new for me to receive my injuries from French hands,' said he.

'And yet it was in the cause of France,' returned the Emperor. Then,
turning to us, he took old Tremeau by the ear. 'Ah, old grumbler,' said
he, 'you were one of my Egyptian grenadiers, were you not, and had your
musket of honour at Marengo. I remember you very well, my good friend.
So the old fires are not yet extinguished! They still burn up when you
think that your Emperor is wronged. And you, Colonel Despienne, you
would not even listen to the tempter. And you, Gerard, your faithful
sword is ever to be between me and my enemies. Well, well, I have had
some traitors about me, but now at last we are beginning to see who are
the true men.'

You can fancy, my friends, the thrill of joy which it gave us when the
greatest man in the whole world spoke to us in this fashion. Tremeau
shook until I thought he would have fallen, and the tears ran down his
gigantic moustache. If you had not seen it, you could never believe the
influence which the Emperor had upon those coarse-grained, savage old
veterans.

'Well, my faithful friends,' said he, 'if you will follow me into this
room, I will explain to you the meaning of this little farce which we
have been acting. I beg, Berthier, that you will remain in this chamber,
and so make sure that no one interrupts us.'

It was new for us to be doing business, with a Marshal of France as
sentry at the door. However, we followed the Emperor as we were ordered,
and he led us into the recess of the window, gathering us around him and
sinking his voice as he addressed us.

'I have picked you out of the whole army,' said he, 'as being not only
the most formidable but also the most faithful of my soldiers. I was
convinced that you were all three men who would never waver in your
fidelity to me. If I have ventured to put that fidelity to the proof,
and to watch you while attempts were at my orders made upon your honour,
it was only because, in the days when I have found the blackest treason
amongst my own flesh and blood, it is necessary that I should be doubly
circumspect. Suffice it that I am well convinced now that I can rely
upon your valour.'

'To the death, sire!' cried Tremeau, and we both repeated it after him.

Napoleon drew us all yet a little closer to him, and sank his voice
still lower.

'What I say to you now I have said to no one--not to my wife or my
brothers; only to you. It is all up with us, my friends. We have come to
our last rally. The game is finished, and we must make provision
accordingly.'

My heart seemed to have changed to a nine-pounder ball as I listened to
him. We had hoped against hope, but now when he, the man who was always
serene and who always had reserves--when he, in that quiet, impassive
voice of his, said that everything was over, we realized that the clouds
had shut for ever, and the last gleam gone. Tremeau snarled and gripped
at his sabre, Despienne ground his teeth, and for my own part I threw
out my chest and clicked my heels to show the Emperor that there were
some spirits which could rise to adversity.

'My papers and my fortune must be secured,' whispered the Emperor. 'The
whole course of the future may depend upon my having them safe. They are
our base for the next attempt--for I am very sure that these poor
Bourbons would find that my footstool is too large to make a throne for
them. Where am I to keep these precious things? My belongings will be
searched--so will the houses of my supporters. They must be secured and
concealed by men whom I can trust with that which is more precious to me
than my life. Out of the whole of France, you are those whom I have
chosen for this sacred trust.

'In the first place, I will tell you what these papers are. You shall
not say that I have made you blind agents in the matter. They are the
official proof of my divorce from Josephine, of my legal marriage to
Marie Louise, and of the birth of my son and heir, the King of Rome. If
we cannot prove each of these, the future claim of my family to the
throne of France falls to the ground. Then there are securities to the
value of forty millions of francs--an immense sum, my friends, but of no
more value than this riding-switch when compared to the other papers of
which I have spoken. I tell you these things that you may realize the
enormous importance of the task which I am committing to your care.
Listen, now, while I inform you where you are to get these papers, and
what you are to do with them.

'They were handed over to my trusty friend, the Countess Walewski, at
Paris, this morning. At five o'clock she starts for Fontainebleau in her
blue berline. She should reach here between half-past nine and ten. The
papers will be concealed in the berline, in a hiding-place which none
know but herself. She has been warned that her carriage will be stopped
outside the town by three mounted officers, and she will hand the packet
over to your care. You are the younger man, Gerard, but you are of the
senior grade. I confide to your care this amethyst ring, which you will
show the lady as a token of your mission, and which you will leave with
her as a receipt for her papers.

'Having received the packet, you will ride with it into the forest as
far as the ruined dove-house--the Colombier. It is possible that I may
meet you there--but if it seems to me to be dangerous, I will send my
body-servant, Mustapha, whose directions you may take as being mine.
There is no roof to the Colombier, and tonight will be a full moon. At
the right of the entrance you will find three spades leaning against the
wall. With these you will dig a hole three feet deep in the
north-eastern corner--that is, in the corner to the left of the door,
and nearest to Fontainebleau. Having buried the papers, you will replace
the soil with great care, and you will then report to me at the palace.'

These were the Emperor's directions, but given with an accuracy and
minuteness of detail such as no one but himself could put into an order.
When he had finished, he made us swear to keep his secret as long as he
lived, and as long as the papers should remain buried. Again and again
he made us swear it before he dismissed us from his presence.

Colonel Despienne had quarters at the 'Sign of the Pheasant,' and it was
there that we supped together. We were all three men who had been
trained to take the strangest turns of fortune as part of our daily life
and business, yet we were all flushed and moved by the extraordinary
interview which we had had, and by the thought of the great adventure
which lay before us. For my own part, it had been my fate three several
times to take my orders from the lips of the Emperor himself, but
neither the incident of the Ajaccio murderers nor the famous ride which
I made to Paris appeared to offer such opportunities as this new and
most intimate commission.

'If things go right with the Emperor,' said Despienne, 'we shall all
live to be marshals yet.'

We drank with him to our future cocked hats and our bâtons.

It was agreed between us that we should make our way separately to our
rendezvous, which was to be the first mile-stone upon the Paris road. In
this way we should avoid the gossip which might get about if three men
who were so well known were to be seen riding out together. My little
Violette had cast a shoe that morning, and the farrier was at work upon
her when I returned, so that my comrades were already there when I
arrived at the trysting-place. I had taken with me not only my sabre,
but also my new pair of English rifled pistols, with a mallet for
knocking in the charges. They had cost me a hundred and fifty francs at
Trouvel's, in the Rue de Rivoli, but they would carry far further and
straighter than the others. It was with one of them that I had saved old
Bouvet's life at Leipzig.

The night was cloudless, and there was a brilliant moon behind us, so
that we always had three black horsemen riding down the white road in
front of us. The country is so thickly wooded, however, that we could
not see very far. The great palace clock had already struck ten, but
there was no sign of the Countess. We began to fear that something might
have prevented her from starting.

And then suddenly we heard her in the distance. Very faint at first were
the birr of wheels and the tat-tat-tat of the horses' feet. Then they
grew louder and clearer and louder yet, until a pair of yellow lanterns
swung round the curve, and in their light we saw the two big brown
horses tearing along the high, blue carriage at the back of them. The
postilion pulled them up panting and foaming within a few yards of us.
In a moment we were at the window and had raised our hands in a salute
to the beautiful pale face which looked out at us.

'We are the three officers of the Emperor, madame,' said I, in a low
voice, leaning my face down to the open window. 'You have already been
warned that we should wait upon you.'

The Countess had a very beautiful, cream-tinted complexion of a sort
which I particularly admire, but she grew whiter and whiter as she
looked up at me. Harsh lines deepened upon her face until she seemed,
even as I looked at her, to turn from youth into age.

'It is evident to me,' she said, 'that you are three impostors.'

If she had struck me across the face with her delicate hand she could
not have startled me more. It was not her words only, but the bitterness
with which she hissed them out.

'Indeed, madame,' said I. 'You do us less than justice. These are the
Colonel Despienne and Captain Tremeau. For myself, my name is Brigadier
Gerard, and I have only to mention it to assure anyone who has heard of
me that----'

'Oh, you villains!' she interrupted. 'You think that because I am only a
woman I am very easily to be hoodwinked! You miserable impostors!'

I looked at Despienne, who had turned white with anger, and at Tremeau,
who was tugging at his moustache.

'Madame,' said I, coldly, 'when the Emperor did us the honour to intrust
us with this mission, he gave me this amethyst ring as a token. I had
not thought that three honourable gentlemen would have needed such
corroboration, but I can only confute your unworthy suspicions by
placing it in your hands.'

She held it up in the light of the carriage lamp, and the most dreadful
expression of grief and of horror contorted her face.

'It is his!' she screamed, and then, 'Oh, my God, what have I done? What
have I done?'

I felt that something terrible had befallen. 'Quick, madame, quick!' I
cried. 'Give us the papers!'

'I have already given them.'

'Given them! To whom?'

'To three officers.'

'When?'

'Within the half-hour.'

'Where are they?'

'God help me, I do not know. They stopped the berline, and I handed them
over to them without hesitation, thinking that they had come from the
Emperor.'

It was a thunder-clap. But those are the moments when I am at my finest.

'You remain here,' said I, to my comrades. 'If three horsemen pass you,
stop them at any hazard. The lady will describe them to you. I will be
with you presently.' One shake of the bridle, and I was flying into
Fontainebleau as only Violette could have carried me. At the palace I
flung myself off, rushed up the stairs, brushed aside the lackeys who
would have stopped me, and pushed my way into the Emperor's own cabinet.
He and Macdonald were busy with pencil and compasses over a chart. He
looked up with an angry frown at my sudden entry, but his face changed
colour when he saw that it was I.

'You can leave us, Marshal,' said he, and then, the instant the door was
closed: 'What news about the papers?'

'They are gone!' said I, and in a few curt words I told him what had
happened. His face was calm, but I saw the compasses quiver in his hand.

'You must recover them, Gerard!' he cried. 'The destinies of my dynasty
are at stake. Not a moment is to be lost! To horse, sir, to horse!'

'Who are they, sire?'

'I cannot tell. I am surrounded with treason. But they will take them to
Paris. To whom should they carry them but to the villain Talleyrand?
Yes, yes, they are on the Paris road, and may yet be overtaken. With the
three best mounts in my stables and----'

I did not wait to hear the end of the sentence. I was already clattering
down the stairs. I am sure that five minutes had not passed before I was
galloping Violette out of the town with the bridle of one of the
Emperor's own Arab chargers in either hand. They wished me to take
three, but I should have never dared to look my Violette in the face
again. I feel that the spectacle must have been superb when I dashed up
to my comrades and pulled the horses on to their haunches in the
moonlight.

'No one has passed?'

'No one.'

'Then they are on the Paris road. Quick! Up and after them!'

They did not take long, those good soldiers. In a flash they were upon
the Emperor's horses, and their own left masterless by the roadside.
Then away we went upon our long chase, I in the centre, Despienne upon
my right, and Tremeau a little behind, for he was the heavier man.
Heavens, how we galloped! The twelve flying hoofs roared and roared
along the hard, smooth road. Poplars and moon, black bars and silver
streaks, for mile after mile our course lay along the same chequered
track, with our shadows in front and our dust behind. We could hear the
rasping of bolts and the creaking of shutters from the cottages as we
thundered past them, but we were only three dark blurs upon the road by
the time that the folk could look after us. It was just striking
midnight as we raced into Corbail; but an hostler with a bucket in
either hand was throwing his black shadow across the golden fan which
was cast from the open door of the inn.

'Three riders!' I gasped. 'Have they passed?'

'I have just been watering their horses,' said he. 'I should think
they----'

'On, on, my friends!' and away we flew, striking fire from the
cobblestones of the little town. A gendarme tried to stop up, but his
voice was drowned by our rattle and clatter. The houses slid past, and
we were out on the country road again, with a clear twenty miles between
ourselves and Paris. How could they escape us, with the finest horses in
France behind them? Not one of the three had turned a hair, but Violette
was always a head and shoulders to the front. She was going within
herself too, and I knew by the spring of her that I had only to let her
stretch herself, and the Emperor's horses would see the colour of her
tail.

'There they are!' cried Despienne.

'We have them!' growled Tremeau.

'On, comrades, on!' I shouted, once more.

A long stretch of white road lay before us in the moonlight. Far away
down it we could see three cavaliers, lying low upon their horses'
necks. Every instant they grew larger and clearer as we gained upon
them. I could see quite plainly that the two upon either side were
wrapped in mantles and rode upon chestnut horses, whilst the man between
them was dressed in a chasseur uniform and mounted upon a grey. They
were keeping abreast, but it was easy enough to see from the way in
which he gathered his legs for each spring that the centre horse was far
the fresher of the three. And the rider appeared to be the leader of the
party, for we continually saw the glint of his face in the moonshine as
he looked back to measure the distance between us. At first it was only
a glimmer, then it was cut across with a moustache, and at last when we
began to feel their dust in our throats I could give a name to my man.

'Halt, Colonel de Montluc!' I shouted. 'Halt, in the Emperor's name!'

I had known him for years as a daring officer and an unprincipled
rascal. Indeed, there was a score between us, for he had shot my friend,
Treville, at Warsaw, pulling his trigger, as some said, a good second
before the drop of the handkerchief.

Well, the words were hardly out of my mouth when his two comrades
wheeled round and fired their pistols at us. I heard Despienne give a
terrible cry, and at the same instant both Tremeau and I let drive at
the same man. He fell forward with his hands swinging on each side of
his horse's neck. His comrade spurred on to Tremeau, sabre in hand, and
I heard the crash which comes when a strong cut is met by a stronger
parry. For my own part I never turned my head, but I touched Violette
with the spur for the first time and flew after the leader. That he
should leave his comrades and fly was proof enough that I should leave
mine and follow.

He had gained a couple of hundred paces, but the good little mare set
that right before we could have passed two milestones. It was in vain
that he spurred and thrashed like a gunner driver on a soft road. His
hat flew off with his exertions, and his bald head gleamed in the
moonshine. But do what he might, he still heard the rattle of the hoofs
growing louder and louder behind him. I could not have been twenty yards
from him, and the shadow head was touching the shadow haunch, when he
turned with a curse in his saddle and emptied both his pistols, one
after the other, into Violette.

I have been wounded myself so often that I have to stop and think before
I can tell you the exact number of times. I have been hit by musket
balls, by pistol bullets, and by bursting shells, besides being pierced
by bayonet, lance, sabre, and finally by a brad-awl, which was the most
painful of any. Yet out of all these injuries I have never known the
same deadly sickness as came over me when I felt the poor, silent,
patient creature, which I had come to love more than anything in the
world except my mother and the Emperor, reel and stagger beneath me. I
pulled my second pistol from my holster and fired point-blank between
the fellow's broad shoulders. He slashed his horse across the flank with
his whip, and for a moment I thought that I had missed him. But then on
the green of his chasseur jacket I saw an ever-widening black smudge,
and he began to sway in his saddle, very slightly at first, but more and
more with every bound, until at last over he went, with his foot caught
in the stirrup, and his shoulders thud-thud-thudding along the road,
until the drag was too much for the tired horse, and I closed my hand
upon the foam-spattered bridle-chain. As I pulled him up it eased the
stirrup leather, and the spurred heel clinked loudly as it fell.

'Your papers!' I cried, springing from my saddle. 'This instant!'

But even as I said, it, the huddle of the green body and the fantastic
sprawl of the limbs in the moonlight told me clearly enough that it was
all over with him. My bullet had passed through his heart, and it was
only his own iron will which had held him so long in the saddle. He had
lived hard, this Montluc, and I will do him justice to say that he died
hard also.

But it was the papers--always the papers--of which I thought. I opened
his tunic and I felt in his shirt. Then I searched his holsters and his
sabre-tasche. Finally I dragged off his boots, and undid his horse's
girth so as to hunt under the saddle. There was not a nook or crevice
which I did not ransack. It was useless. They were not upon him.

When this stunning blow came upon me I could have sat down by the
roadside and wept. Fate seemed to be fighting against me, and that is an
enemy from whom even a gallant hussar might not be ashamed to flinch. I
stood with my arm over the neck of my poor wounded Violette, and I tried
to think it all out, that I might act in the wisest way. I was aware
that the Emperor had no great respect for my wits, and I longed to show
him that he had done me an injustice. Montluc had not the papers. And
yet Montluc had sacrificed his companions in order to make his escape. I
could make nothing of that. On the other hand, it was clear that, if he
had not got them, one or other of his comrades had. One of them was
certainly dead. The other I had left fighting with Tremeau, and if he
escaped from the old swordsman he had still to pass me. Clearly, my work
lay behind me.

I hammered fresh charges into my pistols after I had turned this over in
my head. Then I put them back in the holsters, and I examined my little
mare, she jerking her head and cocking her ears the while, as if to tell
me that an old soldier like herself did not make a fuss about a scratch
or two. The first shot had merely grazed her off-shoulder, leaving a
skin-mark, as if she had brushed a wall. The second was more serious. It
had passed through the muscle of her neck, but already it had ceased to
bleed. I reflected that if she weakened I could mount Montluc's grey,
and meanwhile I led him along beside us, for he was a fine horse, worth
fifteen hundred francs at the least, and it seemed to me that no one had
a better right to him than I.

Well, I was all impatience now to get back to the others, and I had just
given Violette her head, when suddenly I saw something glimmering in a
field by the roadside. It was the brass-work upon the chasseur hat which
had flown from Montluc's head; and at the sight of it a thought made me
jump in the saddle. How could the hat have flown off? With its weight,
would it not have simply dropped? And here it lay, fifteen paces from
the roadway! Of course, he must have thrown it off when he had made sure
that I would overtake him. And if he threw it off--I did not stop to
reason any more, but sprang from the mare with my heart beating the
_pas-de-charge_. Yes, it was all right this time. There, in the crown of
the hat was stuffed a roll of papers in a parchment wrapper bound round
with yellow ribbon. I pulled it out with the one hand and, holding the
hat in the other, I danced for joy in the moonlight. The Emperor would
see that he had not made a mistake when he put his affairs into the
charge of Etienne Gerard.

I had a safe pocket on the inside of my tunic just over my heart, where
I kept a few little things which were dear to me, and into this I thrust
my precious roll. Then I sprang upon Violette, and was pushing forward
to see what had become of Tremeau, when I saw a horseman riding across
the field in the distance. At the same instant I heard the sound of
hoofs approaching me, and there in the moonlight was the Emperor upon
his white charger, dressed in his grey overcoat and his three-cornered
hat, just as I had seen him so often upon the field of battle.

'Well!' he cried, in the sharp, sergeant-major way of his. 'Where are my
papers?'

I spurred forward and presented them without a word. He broke the ribbon
and ran his eyes rapidly over them. Then, as we sat our horses head to
tail, he threw his left arm across me with his hand upon my shoulder.
Yes, my friends, simple as you see me, I have been embraced by my great
master.

'Gerard,' he cried, 'you are a marvel!'

I did not wish to contradict him, and it brought a flush of joy upon my
cheeks to know that he had done me justice at last.

'Where is the thief, Gerard?' he asked.

'Dead, sire.'

'You killed him?'

'He wounded my horse, sire, and would have escaped had I not shot him.'

'Did you recognize him?'

'De Montluc is his name, sire--a Colonel of Chasseurs.'

'Tut,' said the Emperor. 'We have got the poor pawn, but the hand which
plays the game is still out of our reach.' He sat in silent thought for
a little, with his chin sunk upon his chest. 'Ah, Talleyrand,
Talleyrand,' I heard him mutter, 'if I had been in your place and you in
mine, you would have crushed a viper when you held it under your heel.
For five years I have known you for what you are, and yet I have let you
live to sting me. Never mind, my brave,' he continued, turning to me,
'there will come a day of reckoning for everybody, and when it arrives,
I promise you that my friends will be remembered as well as my enemies.'

'Sire,' said I, for I had had time for thought as well as he, 'if your
plans about these papers have been carried to the ears of your enemies,
I trust you do not think that it was owing to any indiscretion upon the
part of myself or of my comrades.'

'It would be hardly reasonable for me to do so,' he answered, 'seeing
that this plot was hatched in Paris, and that you only had your orders a
few hours ago.'

'Then how----?'

'Enough,' he cried, sternly. 'You take an undue advantage of your
position.'

That was always the way with the Emperor. He would chat with you as with
a friend and a brother, and then when he had wiled you into forgetting
the gulf which lay between you, he would suddenly, with a word or with a
look, remind you that it was as impassable as ever. When I have fondled
my old hound until he has been encouraged to paw my knees, and I have
then thrust him down again, it has made me think of the Emperor and his
ways.

He reined his horse round, and I followed him in silence and with a
heavy heart. But when he spoke again his words were enough to drive all
thought of myself out of my mind.

'I could not sleep until I knew how you had fared,' said he. 'I have
paid a price for my papers. There are not so many of my old soldiers
left that I can afford to lose two in one night.'

When he said 'two' it turned me cold.

'Colonel Despienne was shot, sire,' I stammered.

'And Captain Tremeau cut down. Had I been a few minutes earlier, I might
have saved him. The other escaped across the fields.'

I remembered that I had seen a horseman a moment before I had met the
Emperor. He had taken to the fields to avoid me, but if I had known, and
Violette been unwounded, the old soldier would not have gone unavenged.
I was thinking sadly of his sword-play, and wondering whether it was his
stiffening wrist which had been fatal to him, when Napoleon spoke again.

'Yes, Brigadier,' said he, 'you are now the only man who will know where
these papers are concealed.'

It must have been imagination, my friends, but for an instant I may
confess that it seemed to me that there was a tone in the Emperor's
voice which was not altogether one of sorrow. But the dark thought had
hardly time to form itself in my mind before he let me see that I was
doing him an injustice.

'Yes, I have paid a price for my papers,' he said, and I heard them
crackle as he put his hand up to his bosom. 'No man has ever had more
faithful servants--no man since the beginning of the world.'

As he spoke we came upon the scene of the struggle. Colonel Despienne
and the man whom we had shot lay together some distance down the road,
while their horses grazed contentedly beneath the poplars. Captain
Tremeau lay in front of us upon his back, with his arms and legs
stretched out, and his sabre broken short off in his hand. His tunic was
open, and a huge blood-clot hung like a dark handkerchief out of a slit
in his white shirt. I could see the gleam of his clenched teeth from
under his immense moustache.

The Emperor sprang from his horse and bent down over the dead man.

'He was with me since Rivoli,' said he, sadly. 'He was one of my old
grumblers in Egypt.'

And the voice brought the man back from the dead. I saw his eyelids
shiver. He twitched his arm, and moved the sword-hilt a few inches. He
was trying to raise it in salute. Then the mouth opened, and the hilt
tinkled down on to the ground.

'May we all die as gallantly,' said the Emperor, as he rose, and from my
heart I added 'Amen.'

There was a farm within fifty yards of where we were standing, and the
farmer, roused from his sleep by the clatter of hoofs and the cracking
of pistols, had rushed out to the roadside. We saw him now, dumb with
fear and astonishment, staring open-eyed at the Emperor. It was to him
that we committed the care of the four dead men and of the horses also.
For my own part, I thought it best to leave Violette with him and to
take De Montluc's grey with me, for he could not refuse to give me back
my own mare, whilst there might be difficulties about the other.
Besides, my little friend's wound had to be considered, and we had a
long return ride before us.

The Emperor did not at first talk much upon the way. Perhaps the deaths
of Despienne and Tremeau still weighed heavily upon his spirits. He was
always a reserved man, and in those times, when every hour brought him
the news of some success of his enemies or defection of his friends, one
could not expect him to be a merry companion. Nevertheless, when I
reflected that he was carrying in his bosom those papers which he valued
so highly, and which only a few hours ago appeared to be for ever lost,
and when I further thought that it was I, Etienne Gerard, who had placed
them there, I felt that I had deserved some little consideration. The
same idea may have occurred to him, for when we had at last left the
Paris high road, and had entered the forest, he began of his own accord
to tell me that which I should have most liked to have asked him.

'As to the papers,' said he, 'I have already told you that there is no
one now, except you and me, who knows where they are to be concealed. My
Mameluke carried the spades to the pigeon-house, but I have told him
nothing. Our plans, however, for bringing the packet from Paris have
been formed since Monday. There were three in the secret, a woman and
two men. The woman I would trust with my life; which of the two men has
betrayed us I do not know, but I think that I may promise to find out.'

We were riding in the shadow of the trees at the time, and I could hear
him slapping his riding-whip against his boot, and taking pinch after
pinch of snuff, as was his way when he was excited.

'You wonder, no doubt,' said he, after a pause, 'why these rascals did
not stop the carriage at Paris instead of at the entrance to
Fontainebleau.'

In truth, the objection had not occurred to me, but I did not wish to
appear to have less wits than he gave me credit for, so I answered that
it was indeed surprising.

'Had they done so they would have made a public scandal, and run a
chance of missing their end. Short of taking the berline to pieces, they
could not have discovered the hiding-place. He planned it well--he could
always plan well--and he chose his agents well also. But mine were the
better.'

It is not for me to repeat to you, my friends, all that was said to me
by the Emperor as we walked our horses amid the black shadows and
through the moon-silvered glades of the great forest. Every word of it
is impressed upon my memory, and before I pass away it is likely that I
will place it all upon paper, so that others may read it in the days to
come. He spoke freely of his past, and something also of his future; of
the devotion of Macdonald, of the treason of Marmont, of the little King
of Rome, concerning whom he talked with as much tenderness as any
bourgeois father of a single child; and, finally, of his father-in-law,
the Emperor of Austria, who would, he thought, stand between his enemies
and himself. For myself, I dared not say a word, remembering how I had
already brought a rebuke upon myself; but I rode by his side, hardly
able to believe that this was indeed the great Emperor, the man whose
glance sent a thrill through me, who was now pouring out his thoughts to
me in short, eager sentences, the words rattling and racing like the
hoofs of a galloping squadron. It is possible that, after the
word-splittings and diplomacy of a Court, it was a relief to him to
speak his mind to a plain soldier like myself.

In this way the Emperor and I--even after years it sends a flush of
pride into my cheeks to be able to put those words together--the Emperor
and I walked our horses through the Forest of Fontainebleau, until we
came at last to the Colombier. The three spades were propped against the
wall upon the right-hand side of the ruined door, and at the sight of
them the tears sprang to my eyes as I thought of the hands for which
they were intended. The Emperor seized one and I another.

'Quick!' said he. 'The dawn will be upon us before we get back to the
palace.'

We dug the hole, and placing the papers in one of my pistol holsters to
screen them from the damp, we laid them at the bottom and covered them
up. We then carefully removed all marks of the ground having been
disturbed, and we placed a large stone upon the top. I dare say that
since the Emperor was a young gunner, and helped to train his pieces
against Toulon, he had not worked so hard with his hands. He was mopping
his forehead with his silk handkerchief long before we had come to the
end of our task.

The first grey cold light of morning was stealing through the tree
trunks when we came out together from the old pigeon-house. The Emperor
laid his hand upon my shoulder as I stood ready to help him to mount.

'We have left the papers there,' said he, solemnly, 'and I desire that
you shall leave all thought of them there also. Let the recollection of
them pass entirely from your mind, to be revived only when you receive a
direct order under my own hand and seal. From this time onwards you
forget all that has passed.'

'I forget it, sire,' said I.

We rode together to the edge of the town, where he desired that I should
separate from him. I had saluted, and was turning my horse, when he
called me back.

'It is easy to mistake the points of the compass in the forest,' said
he. 'Would you not say that it was in the north-eastern corner that we
buried them?'

'Buried what, sire?'

'The papers, of course,' he cried, impatiently.

'What papers, sire?'

'Name of a name! Why, the papers that you have recovered for me.'

'I am really at a loss to know what your Majesty is talking about.'

He flushed with anger for a moment, and then he burst out laughing.

'Very good, Brigadier!' he cried. 'I begin to believe that you are as
good a diplomatist as you are a soldier, and I cannot say more than
that.'

       *       *       *       *       *

So that was my strange adventure in which I found myself the friend and
confident agent of the Emperor. When he returned from Elba he refrained
from digging up the papers until his position should be secure, and they
still remained in the corner of the old pigeon-house after his exile to
St Helena. It was at this time that he was desirous of getting them into
the hands of his own supporters, and for that purpose he wrote me, as I
afterwards learned, three letters, all of which were intercepted by his
guardians. Finally, he offered to support himself and his own
establishment--which he might very easily have done out of the gigantic
sum which belonged to him--if they would only pass one of his letters
unopened. This request was refused, and so, up to his death in '21, the
papers still remained where I have told you. How they came to be dug up
by Count Bertrand and myself, and who eventually obtained them, is a
story which I would tell you, were it not that the end has not yet come.

Some day you will hear of those papers, and you will see how, after he
has been so long in his grave, that great man can still set Europe
shaking. When that day comes, you will think of Etienne Gerard, and you
will tell your children that you have heard the story from the lips of
the man who was the only one living of all who took part in that strange
history--the man who was tempted by Marshal Berthier, who led that wild
pursuit upon the Paris road, who was honoured by the embrace of the
Emperor, and who rode with him by moonlight in the Forest of
Fontainebleau. The buds are bursting and the birds are calling, my
friends. You may find better things to do in the sunlight than listening
to the stories of an old, broken soldier. And yet you may well treasure
what I say, for the buds will have burst and the birds sung in many
seasons before France will see such another ruler as he whose servants
we were proud to be.

Through the Magic Door

by Arthur Conan Doyle


Contents

 I.
 II.
 III.
 IV.
 V.
 VI.
 VII.
 VIII.
 IX.
 X.
 XI.
 XII.




I.


I care not how humble your bookshelf may be, nor how lowly the room
which it adorns. Close the door of that room behind you, shut off with
it all the cares of the outer world, plunge back into the soothing
company of the great dead, and then you are through the magic portal
into that fair land whither worry and vexation can follow you no more.
You have left all that is vulgar and all that is sordid behind you.
There stand your noble, silent comrades, waiting in their ranks. Pass
your eye down their files. Choose your man. And then you have but to
hold up your hand to him and away you go together into dreamland.
Surely there would be something eerie about a line of books were it not
that familiarity has deadened our sense of it. Each is a mummified soul
embalmed in cere-cloth and natron of leather and printer’s ink. Each
cover of a true book enfolds the concentrated essence of a man. The
personalities of the writers have faded into the thinnest shadows, as
their bodies into impalpable dust, yet here are their very spirits at
your command.

It is our familiarity also which has lessened our perception of the
miraculous good fortune which we enjoy. Let us suppose that we were
suddenly to learn that Shakespeare had returned to earth, and that he
would favour any of us with an hour of his wit and his fancy. How
eagerly we would seek him out! And yet we have him—the very best of
him—at our elbows from week to week, and hardly trouble ourselves to
put out our hands to beckon him down. No matter what mood a man may be
in, when once he has passed through the magic door he can summon the
world’s greatest to sympathize with him in it. If he be thoughtful,
here are the kings of thought. If he be dreamy, here are the masters of
fancy. Or is it amusement that he lacks? He can signal to any one of
the world’s great story-tellers, and out comes the dead man and holds
him enthralled by the hour. The dead are such good company that one may
come to think too little of the living. It is a real and a pressing
danger with many of us, that we should never find our own thoughts and
our own souls, but be ever obsessed by the dead. Yet second-hand
romance and second-hand emotion are surely better than the dull,
soul-killing monotony which life brings to most of the human race. But
best of all when the dead man’s wisdom and the dead man’s example give
us guidance and strength and in the living of our own strenuous days.

Come through the magic door with me, and sit here on the green settee,
where you can see the old oak case with its untidy lines of volumes.
Smoking is not forbidden. Would you care to hear me talk of them? Well,
I ask nothing better, for there is no volume there which is not a dear,
personal friend, and what can a man talk of more pleasantly than that?
The other books are over yonder, but these are my own favourites—the
ones I care to re-read and to have near my elbow. There is not a
tattered cover which does not bring its mellow memories to me.

Some of them represent those little sacrifices which make a possession
dearer. You see the line of old, brown volumes at the bottom? Every one
of those represents a lunch. They were bought in my student days, when
times were not too affluent. Threepence was my modest allowance for my
midday sandwich and glass of beer; but, as luck would have it, my way
to the classes led past the most fascinating bookshop in the world.
Outside the door of it stood a large tub filled with an ever-changing
litter of tattered books, with a card above which announced that any
volume therein could be purchased for the identical sum which I carried
in my pocket. As I approached it a combat ever raged betwixt the hunger
of a youthful body and that of an inquiring and omnivorous mind. Five
times out of six the animal won. But when the mental prevailed, then
there was an entrancing five minutes’ digging among out-of-date
almanacs, volumes of Scotch theology, and tables of logarithms, until
one found something which made it all worth while. If you will look
over these titles, you will see that I did not do so very badly. Four
volumes of Gordon’s “Tacitus” (life is too short to read originals, so
long as there are good translations), Sir William Temple’s Essays,
Addison’s works, Swift’s “Tale of a Tub,” Clarendon’s “History,” “Gil
Blas,” Buckingham’s Poems, Churchill’s Poems, “Life of Bacon”—not so
bad for the old threepenny tub.

They were not always in such plebeian company. Look at the thickness of
the rich leather, and the richness of the dim gold lettering. Once they
adorned the shelves of some noble library, and even among the odd
almanacs and the sermons they bore the traces of their former
greatness, like the faded silk dress of the reduced gentlewoman, a
present pathos but a glory of the past.

Reading is made too easy nowadays, with cheap paper editions and free
libraries. A man does not appreciate at its full worth the thing that
comes to him without effort. Who now ever gets the thrill which Carlyle
felt when he hurried home with the six volumes of Gibbon’s “History”
under his arm, his mind just starving for want of food, to devour them
at the rate of one a day? A book should be your very own before you can
really get the taste of it, and unless you have worked for it, you will
never have the true inward pride of possession.

If I had to choose the one book out of all that line from which I have
had most pleasure and most profit, I should point to yonder stained
copy of Macaulay’s “Essays.” It seems entwined into my whole life as I
look backwards. It was my comrade in my student days, it has been with
me on the sweltering Gold Coast, and it formed part of my humble kit
when I went a-whaling in the Arctic. Honest Scotch harpooners have
addled their brains over it, and you may still see the grease stains
where the second engineer grappled with Frederick the Great. Tattered
and dirty and worn, no gilt-edged morocco-bound volume could ever take
its place for me.

What a noble gateway this book forms through which one may approach the
study either of letters or of history! Milton, Machiavelli, Hallam,
Southey, Bunyan, Byron, Johnson, Pitt, Hampden, Clive, Hastings,
Chatham—what nuclei for thought! With a good grip of each how pleasant
and easy to fill in all that lies between! The short, vivid sentences,
the broad sweep of allusion, the exact detail, they all throw a glamour
round the subject and should make the least studious of readers desire
to go further. If Macaulay’s hand cannot lead a man upon those pleasant
paths, then, indeed, he may give up all hope of ever finding them.

When I was a senior schoolboy this book—not this very volume, for it
had an even more tattered predecessor—opened up a new world to me.
History had been a lesson and abhorrent. Suddenly the task and the
drudgery became an incursion into an enchanted land, a land of colour
and beauty, with a kind, wise guide to point the path. In that great
style of his I loved even the faults—indeed, now that I come to think
of it, it was the faults which I loved best. No sentence could be too
stiff with rich embroidery, and no antithesis too flowery. It pleased
me to read that “a universal shout of laughter from the Tagus to the
Vistula informed the Pope that the days of the crusades were past,” and
I was delighted to learn that “Lady Jerningham kept a vase in which
people placed foolish verses, and Mr. Dash wrote verses which were fit
to be placed in Lady Jerningham’s vase.” Those were the kind of
sentences which used to fill me with a vague but enduring pleasure,
like chords which linger in the musician’s ear. A man likes a plainer
literary diet as he grows older, but still as I glance over the Essays
I am filled with admiration and wonder at the alternate power of
handling a great subject, and of adorning it by delightful detail—just
a bold sweep of the brush, and then the most delicate stippling. As he
leads you down the path, he for ever indicates the alluring side-tracks
which branch away from it. An admirable, if somewhat old-fashioned,
literary and historical education might be effected by working through
every book which is alluded to in the Essays. I should be curious,
however, to know the exact age of the youth when he came to the end of
his studies.

I wish Macaulay had written a historical novel. I am convinced that it
would have been a great one. I do not know if he had the power of
drawing an imaginary character, but he certainly had the gift of
reconstructing a dead celebrity to a remarkable degree. Look at the
simple half-paragraph in which he gives us Johnson and his atmosphere.
Was ever a more definite picture given in a shorter space—

“As we close it, the club-room is before us, and the table on which
stand the omelet for Nugent, and the lemons for Johnson. There are
assembled those heads which live for ever on the canvas of Reynolds.
There are the spectacles of Burke, and the tall thin form of Langton,
the courtly sneer of Beauclerk and the beaming smile of Garrick, Gibbon
tapping his snuff-box, and Sir Joshua with his trumpet in his ear. In
the foreground is that strange figure which is as familiar to us as the
figures of those among whom we have been brought up—the gigantic body,
the huge massy face, seamed with the scars of disease, the brown coat,
the black worsted stockings, the grey wig with the scorched foretop,
the dirty hands, the nails bitten and pared to the quick. We see the
eyes and mouth moving with convulsive twitches; we see the heavy form
rolling; we hear it puffing, and then comes the ‘Why, sir!’ and the
‘What then, sir?’ and the ‘No, sir!’ and the ‘You don’t see your way
through the question, sir!’”

It is etched into your memory for ever.

I can remember that when I visited London at the age of sixteen the
first thing I did after housing my luggage was to make a pilgrimage to
Macaulay’s grave, where he lies in Westminster Abbey, just under the
shadow of Addison, and amid the dust of the poets whom he had loved so
well. It was the one great object of interest which London held for me.
And so it might well be, when I think of all I owe him. It is not
merely the knowledge and the stimulation of fresh interests, but it is
the charming gentlemanly tone, the broad, liberal outlook, the general
absence of bigotry and of prejudice. My judgment now confirms all that
I felt for him then.

My four-volume edition of the History stands, as you see, to the right
of the Essays. Do you recollect the third chapter of that work—the one
which reconstructs the England of the seventeenth century? It has
always seemed to me the very high-water mark of Macaulay’s powers, with
its marvellous mixture of precise fact and romantic phrasing. The
population of towns, the statistics of commerce, the prosaic facts of
life are all transmuted into wonder and interest by the handling of the
master. You feel that he could have cast a glamour over the
multiplication table had he set himself to do so. Take a single
concrete example of what I mean. The fact that a Londoner in the
country, or a countryman in London, felt equally out of place in those
days of difficult travel, would seem to hardly require stating, and to
afford no opportunity of leaving a strong impression upon the reader’s
mind. See what Macaulay makes of it, though it is no more than a
hundred other paragraphs which discuss a hundred various points—

“A cockney in a rural village was stared at as much as if he had
intruded into a kraal of Hottentots. On the other hand, when the lord
of a Lincolnshire or Shropshire manor appeared in Fleet Street, he was
as easily distinguished from the resident population as a Turk or a
Lascar. His dress, his gait, his accent, the manner in which he gazed
at the shops, stumbled into gutters, ran against the porters, and stood
under the waterspouts, marked him out as an excellent subject for the
operations of swindlers and banterers. Bullies jostled him into the
kennel, Hackney coachmen splashed him from head to foot, thieves
explored with perfect security the huge pockets of his horseman’s coat,
while he stood entranced by the splendour of the Lord Mayor’s Show.
Money-droppers, sore from the cart’s tail, introduced themselves to
him, and appeared to him the most honest friendly gentlemen that he had
ever seen. Painted women, the refuse of Lewkner Lane and Whetstone
Park, passed themselves on him for countesses and maids of honour. If
he asked his way to St. James’, his informants sent him to Mile End. If
he went into a shop, he was instantly discerned to be a fit purchaser
of everything that nobody else would buy, of second-hand embroidery,
copper rings, and watches that would not go. If he rambled into any
fashionable coffee-house, he became a mark for the insolent derision of
fops, and the grave waggery of Templars. Enraged and mortified, he soon
returned to his mansion, and there, in the homage of his tenants and
the conversation of his boon companions, found consolation for the
vexations and humiliations which he had undergone. There he was once
more a great man, and saw nothing above himself except when at the
assizes he took his seat on the bench near the Judge, or when at the
muster of the militia he saluted the Lord Lieutenant.”

On the whole, I should put this detached chapter of description at the
very head of his Essays, though it happens to occur in another volume.
The History as a whole does not, as it seems to me, reach the same
level as the shorter articles. One cannot but feel that it is a
brilliant piece of special pleading from a fervid Whig, and that there
must be more to be said for the other side than is there set forth.
Some of the Essays are tinged also, no doubt, by his own political and
religious limitations. The best are those which get right away into the
broad fields of literature and philosophy. Johnson, Walpole, Madame
D’Arblay, Addison, and the two great Indian ones, Clive and Warren
Hastings, are my own favourites. Frederick the Great, too, must surely
stand in the first rank. Only one would I wish to eliminate. It is the
diabolically clever criticism upon Montgomery. One would have wished to
think that Macaulay’s heart was too kind, and his soul too gentle, to
pen so bitter an attack. Bad work will sink of its own weight. It is
not necessary to souse the author as well. One would think more highly
of the man if he had not done that savage bit of work.

I don’t know why talking of Macaulay always makes me think of Scott,
whose books in a faded, olive-backed line, have a shelf, you see, of
their own. Perhaps it is that they both had so great an influence, and
woke such admiration in me. Or perhaps it is the real similarity in the
minds and characters of the two men. You don’t see it, you say? Well,
just think of Scott’s “Border Ballads,” and then of Macaulay’s “Lays.”
The machines must be alike, when the products are so similar. Each was
the only man who could possibly have written the poems of the other.
What swing and dash in both of them! What a love of all that is manly
and noble and martial! So simple, and yet so strong. But there are
minds on which strength and simplicity are thrown away. They think that
unless a thing is obscure it must be superficial, whereas it is often
the shallow stream which is turbid, and the deep which is clear. Do you
remember the fatuous criticism of Matthew Arnold upon the glorious
“Lays,” where he calls out “is this poetry?” after quoting—

“And how can man die better
    Than facing fearful odds
For the ashes of his fathers
    And the Temples of his Gods?”


In trying to show that Macaulay had not the poetic sense he was really
showing that he himself had not the dramatic sense. The baldness of the
idea and of the language had evidently offended him. But this is
exactly where the true merit lies. Macaulay is giving the rough, blunt
words with which a simple-minded soldier appeals to two comrades to
help him in a deed of valour. Any high-flown sentiment would have been
absolutely out of character. The lines are, I think, taken with their
context, admirable ballad poetry, and have just the dramatic quality
and sense which a ballad poet must have. That opinion of Arnold’s shook
my faith in his judgment, and yet I would forgive a good deal to the
man who wrote—

“One more charge and then be dumb,
    When the forts of Folly fall,
May the victors when they come
    Find my body near the wall.”


Not a bad verse that for one’s life aspiration.

This is one of the things which human society has not yet
understood—the value of a noble, inspiriting text. When it does we
shall meet them everywhere engraved on appropriate places, and our
progress through the streets will be brightened and ennobled by one
continual series of beautiful mental impulses and images, reflected
into our souls from the printed thoughts which meet our eyes. To think
that we should walk with empty, listless minds while all this splendid
material is running to waste. I do not mean mere Scriptural texts, for
they do not bear the same meaning to all, though what human creature
can fail to be spurred onwards by “Work while it is day, for the night
cometh when no man can work.” But I mean those beautiful thoughts—who
can say that they are uninspired thoughts?—which may be gathered from a
hundred authors to match a hundred uses. A fine thought in fine
language is a most precious jewel, and should not be hid away, but be
exposed for use and ornament. To take the nearest example, there is a
horse-trough across the road from my house, a plain stone trough, and
no man could pass it with any feelings save vague discontent at its
ugliness. But suppose that on its front slab you print the verse of
Coleridge—

“He prayeth best who loveth best
    All things, both great and small
For the dear Lord who fashioned him
    He knows and loveth all.”


I fear I may misquote, for I have not “The Ancient Mariner” at my
elbow, but even as it stands does it not elevate the horse-trough? We
all do this, I suppose, in a small way for ourselves. There are few men
who have not some chosen quotations printed on their study
mantelpieces, or, better still, in their hearts. Carlyle’s
transcription of “Rest! Rest! Shall I not have all Eternity to rest
in!” is a pretty good spur to a weary man. But what we need is a more
general application of the same thing for public and not for private
use, until people understand that a graven thought is as beautiful an
ornament as any graven image, striking through the eye right deep down
into the soul.

However, all this has nothing to do with Macaulay’s glorious lays, save
that when you want some flowers of manliness and patriotism you can
pluck quite a bouquet out of those. I had the good fortune to learn the
Lay of Horatius off by heart when I was a child, and it stamped itself
on my plastic mind, so that even now I can reel off almost the whole of
it. Goldsmith said that in conversation he was like the man who had a
thousand pounds in the bank, but could not compete with the man who had
an actual sixpence in his pocket. So the ballad that you bear in your
mind outweighs the whole bookshelf which waits for reference. But I
want you now to move your eye a little farther down the shelf to the
line of olive-green volumes. That is my edition of Scott. But surely I
must give you a little breathing space before I venture upon them.




II.


It is a great thing to start life with a small number of really good
books which are your very own. You may not appreciate them at first.
You may pine for your novel of crude and unadulterated adventure. You
may, and will, give it the preference when you can. But the dull days
come, and the rainy days come, and always you are driven to fill up the
chinks of your reading with the worthy books which wait so patiently
for your notice. And then suddenly, on a day which marks an epoch in
your life, you understand the difference. You see, like a flash, how
the one stands for nothing, and the other for literature. From that day
onwards you may return to your crudities, but at least you do so with
some standard of comparison in your mind. You can never be the same as
you were before. Then gradually the good thing becomes more dear to
you; it builds itself up with your growing mind; it becomes a part of
your better self, and so, at last, you can look, as I do now, at the
old covers and love them for all that they have meant in the past. Yes,
it was the olive-green line of Scott’s novels which started me on to
rhapsody. They were the first books I ever owned—long, long before I
could appreciate or even understand them. But at last I realized what a
treasure they were. In my boyhood I read them by surreptitious
candle-ends in the dead of the night, when the sense of crime added a
new zest to the story. Perhaps you have observed that my “Ivanhoe” is
of a different edition from the others. The first copy was left in the
grass by the side of a stream, fell into the water, and was eventually
picked up three days later, swollen and decomposed, upon a mud-bank. I
think I may say, however, that I had worn it out before I lost it.
Indeed, it was perhaps as well that it was some years before it was
replaced, for my instinct was always to read it again instead of
breaking fresh ground.

I remember the late James Payn telling the anecdote that he and two
literary friends agreed to write down what scene in fiction they
thought the most dramatic, and that on examining the papers it was
found that all three had chosen the same. It was the moment when the
unknown knight, at Ashby-de-la-Zouch, riding past the pavilions of the
lesser men, strikes with the sharp end of his lance, in a challenge to
mortal combat, the shield of the formidable Templar. It was, indeed, a
splendid moment! What matter that no Templar was allowed by the rules
of his Order to take part in so secular and frivolous an affair as a
tournament? It is the privilege of great masters to make things so, and
it is a churlish thing to gainsay it. Was it not Wendell Holmes who
described the prosaic man, who enters a drawing-room with a couple of
facts, like ill-conditioned bull-dogs at his heels, ready to let them
loose on any play of fancy? The great writer can never go wrong. If
Shakespeare gives a sea-coast to Bohemia, or if Victor Hugo calls an
English prize-fighter Mr. Jim-John-Jack—well, it _was_ so, and that’s
an end of it. “There is no second line of rails at that point,” said an
editor to a minor author. “I make a second line,” said the author; and
he was within his rights, if he can carry his readers’ conviction with
him.

But this is a digression from “Ivanhoe.” What a book it is! The second
greatest historical novel in our language, I think. Every successive
reading has deepened my admiration for it. Scott’s soldiers are always
as good as his women (with exceptions) are weak; but here, while the
soldiers are at their very best, the romantic figure of Rebecca redeems
the female side of the story from the usual commonplace routine. Scott
drew manly men because he was a manly man himself, and found the task a
sympathetic one.

He drew young heroines because a convention demanded it, which he had
never the hardihood to break. It is only when we get him for a dozen
chapters on end with a minimum of petticoat—in the long stretch, for
example, from the beginning of the Tournament to the end of the Friar
Tuck incident—that we realize the height of continued romantic
narrative to which he could attain. I don’t think in the whole range of
our literature we have a finer sustained flight than that.

There is, I admit, an intolerable amount of redundant verbiage in
Scott’s novels. Those endless and unnecessary introductions make the
shell very thick before you come to the oyster. They are often
admirable in themselves, learned, witty, picturesque, but with no
relation or proportion to the story which they are supposed to
introduce. Like so much of our English fiction, they are very good
matter in a very bad place. Digression and want of method and order are
traditional national sins. Fancy introducing an essay on how to live on
nothing a year as Thackeray did in “Vanity Fair,” or sandwiching in a
ghost story as Dickens has dared to do. As well might a dramatic author
rush up to the footlights and begin telling anecdotes while his play
was suspending its action and his characters waiting wearily behind
him. It is all wrong, though every great name can be quoted in support
of it. Our sense of form is lamentably lacking, and Sir Walter sinned
with the rest. But get past all that to a crisis in the real story, and
who finds the terse phrase, the short fire-word, so surely as he? Do
you remember when the reckless Sergeant of Dragoons stands at last
before the grim Puritan, upon whose head a price has been set: “A
thousand marks or a bed of heather!” says he, as he draws. The Puritan
draws also: “The Sword of the Lord and of Gideon!” says he. No verbiage
there! But the very spirit of either man and of either party, in the
few stern words, which haunt your mind. “Bows and Bills!” cry the Saxon
Varangians, as the Moslem horse charges home. You feel it is just what
they must have cried. Even more terse and businesslike was the actual
battle-cry of the fathers of the same men on that long-drawn day when
they fought under the “Red Dragon of Wessex” on the low ridge at
Hastings. “Out! Out!” they roared, as the Norman chivalry broke upon
them. Terse, strong, prosaic—the very genius of the race was in the
cry.

Is it that the higher emotions are not there? Or is it that they are
damped down and covered over as too precious to be exhibited? Something
of each, perhaps. I once met the widow of the man who, as a young
signal midshipman, had taken Nelson’s famous message from the Signal
Yeoman and communicated it to the ship’s company. The officers were
impressed. The men were not. “Duty!” they muttered. “We’ve always done
it. Why not?” Anything in the least highfalutin’ would depress, not
exalt, a British company. It is the under statement which delights
them. German troops can march to battle singing Luther’s hymns.
Frenchmen will work themselves into a frenzy by a song of glory and of
Fatherland. Our martial poets need not trouble to imitate—or at least
need not imagine that if they do so they will ever supply a want to the
British soldier. Our sailors working the heavy guns in South Africa
sang: “Here’s another lump of sugar for the Bird.” I saw a regiment go
into action to the refrain of “A little bit off the top.” The martial
poet aforesaid, unless he had the genius and the insight of a Kipling,
would have wasted a good deal of ink before he had got down to such
chants as these. The Russians are not unlike us in this respect. I
remember reading of some column ascending a breach and singing lustily
from start to finish, until a few survivors were left victorious upon
the crest with the song still going. A spectator inquired what wondrous
chant it was which had warmed them to such a deed of valour, and he
found that the exact meaning of the words, endlessly repeated, was
“Ivan is in the garden picking cabbages.” The fact is, I suppose, that
a mere monotonous sound may take the place of the tom-tom of savage
warfare, and hypnotize the soldier into valour.

Our cousins across the Atlantic have the same blending of the comic
with their most serious work. Take the songs which they sang during the
most bloody war which the Anglo-Celtic race has ever waged—the only war
in which it could have been said that they were stretched to their
uttermost and showed their true form—“Tramp, tramp, tramp,” “John
Brown’s Body,” “Marching through Georgia”—all had a playful humour
running through them. Only one exception do I know, and that is the
most tremendous war-song I can recall. Even an outsider in time of
peace can hardly read it without emotion. I mean, of course, Julia Ward
Howe’s “War-Song of the Republic,” with the choral opening line: “Mine
eyes have seen the glory of the coming of the Lord.” If that were ever
sung upon a battle-field the effect must have been terrific.

A long digression, is it not? But that is the worst of the thoughts at
the other side of the Magic Door. You can’t pull one out without a
dozen being entangled with it. But it was Scott’s soldiers that I was
talking of, and I was saying that there is nothing theatrical, no
posing, no heroics (the thing of all others which the hero abominates),
but just the short bluff word and the simple manly ways, with every
expression and metaphor drawn from within his natural range of thought.
What a pity it is that he, with his keen appreciation of the soldier,
gave us so little of those soldiers who were his own contemporaries—the
finest, perhaps, that the world has ever seen! It is true that he wrote
a life of the great Soldier Emperor, but that was the one piece of
hackwork of his career. How could a Tory patriot, whose whole training
had been to look upon Napoleon as a malignant Demon, do justice to such
a theme? But the Europe of those days was full of material which he of
all men could have drawn with a sympathetic hand. What would we not
give for a portrait of one of Murat’s light-cavalrymen, or of a
Grenadier of the Old Guard, drawn with the same bold strokes as the
Rittmeister of Gustavus or the archers of the French King’s Guard in
“Quentin Durward”?

In his visit to Paris Scott must have seen many of those iron men who
during the preceding twenty years had been the scourge and also the
redemption of Europe. To us the soldiers who scowled at him from the
sidewalks in 1814 would have been as interesting and as much romantic
figures of the past as the mail-clad knights or ruffling cavaliers of
his novels. A picture from the life of a Peninsular veteran, with his
views upon the Duke, would be as striking as Dugald Dalgetty from the
German wars. But then no man ever does realize the true interest of the
age in which he happens to live. All sense of proportion is lost, and
the little thing hard-by obscures the great thing at a distance. It is
easy in the dark to confuse the fire-fly and the star. Fancy, for
example, the Old Masters seeking their subjects in inn parlours, or St.
Sebastians, while Columbus was discovering America before their very
faces.

I have said that I think “Ivanhoe” the best of Scott’s novels. I
suppose most people would subscribe to that. But how about the second
best? It speaks well for their general average that there is hardly one
among them which might not find some admirers who would vote it to a
place of honour. To the Scottish-born man those novels which deal with
Scottish life and character have a quality of raciness which gives them
a place apart. There is a rich humour of the soil in such books as “Old
Mortality,” “The Antiquary,” and “Rob Roy,” which puts them in a
different class from the others. His old Scottish women are, next to
his soldiers, the best series of types that he has drawn. At the same
time it must be admitted that merit which is associated with dialect
has such limitations that it can never take the same place as work
which makes an equal appeal to all the world. On the whole, perhaps,
“Quentin Durward,” on account of its wider interests, its strong
character-drawing, and the European importance of the events and people
described, would have my vote for the second place. It is the father of
all those sword-and-cape novels which have formed so numerous an
addition to the light literature of the last century. The pictures of
Charles the Bold and of the unspeakable Louis are extraordinarily
vivid. I can see those two deadly enemies watching the hounds chasing
the herald, and clinging to each other in the convulsion of their cruel
mirth, more clearly than most things which my eyes have actually rested
upon.

The portrait of Louis with his astuteness, his cruelty, his
superstition and his cowardice is followed closely from Comines, and is
the more effective when set up against his bluff and war-like rival. It
is not often that historical characters work out in their actual
physique exactly as one would picture them to be, but in the High
Church of Innsbruck I have seen effigies of Louis and Charles which
might have walked from the very pages of Scott-Louis, thin, ascetic,
varminty; and Charles with the head of a prize-fighter. It is hard on
us when a portrait upsets all our preconceived ideas, when, for
example, we see in the National Portrait Gallery a man with a noble,
olive-tinted, poetic face, and with a start read beneath it that it is
the wicked Judge Jeffreys. Occasionally, however, as at Innsbruck, we
are absolutely satisfied. I have before me on the mantelpiece yonder a
portrait of a painting which represents Queen Mary’s Bothwell. Take it
down and look at it. Mark the big head, fit to conceive large schemes;
the strong animal face, made to captivate a sensitive, feminine woman;
the brutally forceful features—the mouth with a suggestion of wild
boars’ tusks behind it, the beard which could bristle with fury: the
whole man and his life-history are revealed in that picture. I wonder
if Scott had ever seen the original which hangs at the Hepburn family
seat?

Personally, I have always had a very high opinion of a novel which the
critics have used somewhat harshly, and which came almost the last from
his tired pen. I mean “Count Robert of Paris.” I am convinced that if
it had been the first, instead of the last, of the series it would have
attracted as much attention as “Waverley.” I can understand the state
of mind of the expert, who cried out in mingled admiration and despair:
“I have studied the conditions of Byzantine Society all my life, and
here comes a Scotch lawyer who makes the whole thing clear to me in a
flash!” Many men could draw with more or less success Norman England,
or mediaeval France, but to reconstruct a whole dead civilization in so
plausible a way, with such dignity and such minuteness of detail, is, I
should think, a most wonderful _tour de force_. His failing health
showed itself before the end of the novel, but had the latter half
equalled the first, and contained scenes of such humour as Anna Comnena
reading aloud her father’s exploits, or of such majesty as the account
of the muster of the Crusaders upon the shores of the Bosphorus, then
the book could not have been gainsaid its rightful place in the very
front rank of the novels.

I would that he had carried on his narrative, and given us a glimpse of
the actual progress of the First Crusade. What an incident! Was ever
anything in the world’s history like it? It had what historical
incidents seldom have, a definite beginning, middle and end, from the
half-crazed preaching of Peter down to the Fall of Jerusalem. Those
leaders! It would take a second Homer to do them justice. Godfrey the
perfect soldier and leader, Bohemund the unscrupulous and formidable,
Tancred the ideal knight errant, Robert of Normandy the half-mad hero!
Here is material so rich that one feels one is not worthy to handle it.
What richest imagination could ever evolve anything more marvellous and
thrilling than the actual historical facts?

But what a glorious brotherhood the novels are! Think of the pure
romance of “The Talisman”; the exquisite picture of Hebridean life in
“The Pirate”; the splendid reproduction of Elizabethan England in
“Kenilworth”; the rich humour of the “Legend of Montrose”; above all,
bear in mind that in all that splendid series, written in a coarse age,
there is not one word to offend the most sensitive ear, and it is borne
in upon one how great and noble a man was Walter Scott, and how high
the service which he did for literature and for humanity.

For that reason his life is good reading, and there it is on the same
shelf as the novels. Lockhart was, of course, his son-in-law and his
admiring friend. The ideal biographer should be a perfectly impartial
man, with a sympathetic mind, but a stern determination to tell the
absolute truth. One would like the frail, human side of a man as well
as the other. I cannot believe that anyone in the world was ever quite
so good as the subject of most of our biographies. Surely these worthy
people swore a little sometimes, or had a keen eye for a pretty face,
or opened the second bottle when they would have done better to stop at
the first, or did something to make us feel that they were men and
brothers. They need not go the length of the lady who began a biography
of her deceased husband with the words—“D—— was a dirty man,” but the
books certainly would be more readable, and the subjects more lovable
too, if we had greater light and shade in the picture.

But I am sure that the more one knew of Scott the more one would have
admired him. He lived in a drinking age, and in a drinking country, and
I have not a doubt that he took an allowance of toddy occasionally of
an evening which would have laid his feeble successors under the table.
His last years, at least, poor fellow, were abstemious enough, when he
sipped his barley-water, while the others passed the decanter. But what
a high-souled chivalrous gentleman he was, with how fine a sense of
honour, translating itself not into empty phrases, but into years of
labour and denial! You remember how he became sleeping partner in a
printing house, and so involved himself in its failure. There was a
legal, but very little moral, claim against him, and no one could have
blamed him had he cleared the account by a bankruptcy, which would have
enabled him to become a rich man again within a few years. Yet he took
the whole burden upon himself and bore it for the rest of his life,
spending his work, his time, and his health in the one long effort to
save his honour from the shadow of a stain. It was nearly a hundred
thousand pounds, I think, which he passed on to the creditors—a great
record, a hundred thousand pounds, with his life thrown in.

And what a power of work he had! It was superhuman. Only the man who
has tried to write fiction himself knows what it means when it is
recorded that Scott produced two of his long novels in one single year.
I remember reading in some book of reminiscences—on second thoughts it
was in Lockhart himself—how the writer had lodged in some rooms in
Castle Street, Edinburgh, and how he had seen all evening the
silhouette of a man outlined on the blind of the opposite house. All
evening the man wrote, and the observer could see the shadow hand
conveying the sheets of paper from the desk to the pile at the side. He
went to a party and returned, but still the hand was moving the sheets.
Next morning he was told that the rooms opposite were occupied by
Walter Scott.

A curious glimpse into the psychology of the writer of fiction is shown
by the fact that he wrote two of his books—good ones, too—at a time
when his health was such that he could not afterwards remember one word
of them, and listened to them when they were read to him as if he were
hearing the work of another man. Apparently the simplest processes of
the brain, such as ordinary memory, were in complete abeyance, and yet
the very highest and most complex faculty—imagination in its supreme
form—was absolutely unimpaired. It is an extraordinary fact, and one to
be pondered over. It gives some support to the feeling which every
writer of imaginative work must have, that his supreme work comes to
him in some strange way from without, and that he is only the medium
for placing it upon the paper. The creative thought—the germ thought
from which a larger growth is to come, flies through his brain like a
bullet. He is surprised at his own idea, with no conscious sense of
having originated it. And here we have a man, with all other brain
functions paralyzed, producing this magnificent work. Is it possible
that we are indeed but conduit pipes from the infinite reservoir of the
unknown? Certainly it is always our best work which leaves the least
sense of personal effort.

And to pursue this line of thought, is it possible that frail physical
powers and an unstable nervous system, by keeping a man’s materialism
at its lowest, render him a more fitting agent for these spiritual
uses? It is an old tag that

“Great Genius is to madness close allied,
And thin partitions do those rooms divide.”


But, apart from genius, even a moderate faculty for imaginative work
seems to me to weaken seriously the ties between the soul and the body.

Look at the British poets of a century ago: Chatterton, Burns, Shelley,
Keats, Byron. Burns was the oldest of that brilliant band, yet Burns
was only thirty-eight when he passed away, “burned out,” as his brother
terribly expressed it. Shelley, it is true, died by accident, and
Chatterton by poison, but suicide is in itself a sign of a morbid
state. It is true that Rogers lived to be almost a centenarian, but he
was banker first and poet afterwards. Wordsworth, Tennyson, and
Browning have all raised the average age of the poets, but for some
reason the novelists, especially of late years, have a deplorable
record. They will end by being scheduled with the white-lead workers
and other dangerous trades. Look at the really shocking case of the
young Americans, for example. What a band of promising young writers
have in a few years been swept away! There was the author of that
admirable book, “David Harum”; there was Frank Norris, a man who had in
him, I think, the seeds of greatness more than almost any living
writer. His “Pit” seemed to me one of the finest American novels. He
also died a premature death. Then there was Stephen Crane—a man who had
also done most brilliant work, and there was Harold Frederic, another
master-craftsman. Is there any profession in the world which in
proportion to its numbers could show such losses as that? In the
meantime, out of our own men Robert Louis Stevenson is gone, and Henry
Seton Merriman, and many another.

Even those great men who are usually spoken of as if they had rounded
off their career were really premature in their end. Thackeray, for
example, in spite of his snowy head, was only 52; Dickens attained the
age of 58; on the whole, Sir Walter, with his 61 years of life,
although he never wrote a novel until he was over 40, had, fortunately
for the world, a longer working career than most of his brethren.

He employed his creative faculty for about twenty years, which is as
much, I suppose, as Shakespeare did. The bard of Avon is another
example of the limited tenure which Genius has of life, though I
believe that he outlived the greater part of his own family, who were
not a healthy stock. He died, I should judge, of some nervous disease;
that is shown by the progressive degeneration of his signature.
Probably it was locomotor ataxy, which is the special scourge of the
imaginative man. Heine, Daudet, and how many more, were its victims. As
to the tradition, first mentioned long after his death, that he died of
a fever contracted from a drinking bout, it is absurd on the face of
it, since no such fever is known to science. But a very moderate
drinking bout would be extremely likely to bring a chronic nervous
complaint to a disastrous end.

One other remark upon Scott before I pass on from that line of green
volumes which has made me so digressive and so garrulous. No account of
his character is complete which does not deal with the strange,
secretive vein which ran through his nature. Not only did he stretch
the truth on many occasions in order to conceal the fact that he was
the author of the famous novels, but even intimate friends who met him
day by day were not aware that he was the man about whom the whole of
Europe was talking. Even his wife was ignorant of his pecuniary
liabilities until the crash of the Ballantyne firm told her for the
first time that they were sharers in the ruin. A psychologist might
trace this strange twist of his mind in the numerous elfish
Fenella-like characters who flit about and keep their irritating secret
through the long chapters of so many of his novels.

It’s a sad book, Lockhart’s “Life.” It leaves gloom in the mind. The
sight of this weary giant, staggering along, burdened with debt,
overladen with work, his wife dead, his nerves broken, and nothing
intact but his honour, is one of the most moving in the history of
literature. But they pass, these clouds, and all that is left is the
memory of the supremely noble man, who would not be bent, but faced
Fate to the last, and died in his tracks without a whimper. He sampled
every human emotion. Great was his joy and great his success, great was
his downfall and bitter his grief. But of all the sons of men I don’t
think there are many greater than he who lies under the great slab at
Dryburgh.




III.


We can pass the long green ranks of the Waverley Novels and Lockhart’s
“Life” which flanks them. Here is heavier metal in the four big grey
volumes beyond. They are an old-fashioned large-print edition of
Boswell’s “Life of Johnson.” I emphasize the large print, for that is
the weak point of most of the cheap editions of English Classics which
come now into the market. With subjects which are in the least archaic
or abstruse you need good clear type to help you on your way. The other
is good neither for your eyes nor for your temper. Better pay a little
more and have a book that is made for use.

That book interests me—fascinates me—and yet I wish I could join
heartily in that chorus of praise which the kind-hearted old bully has
enjoyed. It is difficult to follow his own advice and to “clear one’s
mind of cant” upon the subject, for when you have been accustomed to
look at him through the sympathetic glasses of Macaulay or of Boswell,
it is hard to take them off, to rub one’s eyes, and to have a good
honest stare on one’s own account at the man’s actual words, deeds, and
limitations. If you try it you are left with the oddest mixture of
impressions. How could one express it save that this is John Bull taken
to literature—the exaggerated John Bull of the caricaturists—with every
quality, good or evil, at its highest? Here are the rough crust over a
kindly heart, the explosive temper, the arrogance, the insular
narrowness, the want of sympathy and insight, the rudeness of
perception, the positiveness, the overbearing bluster, the strong
deep-seated religious principle, and every other characteristic of the
cruder, rougher John Bull who was the great grandfather of the present
good-natured Johnnie.

If Boswell had not lived I wonder how much we should hear now of his
huge friend? With Scotch persistence he has succeeded in inoculating
the whole world with his hero worship. It was most natural that he
should himself admire him. The relations between the two men were
delightful and reflect all credit upon each. But they are not a safe
basis from which any third person could argue. When they met, Boswell
was in his twenty-third and Johnson in his fifty-fourth year. The one
was a keen young Scot with a mind which was reverent and
impressionable. The other was a figure from a past generation with his
fame already made. From the moment of meeting the one was bound to
exercise an absolute ascendency over the other which made unbiassed
criticism far more difficult than it would be between ordinary father
and son. Up to the end this was the unbroken relation between them.

It is all very well to pooh-pooh Boswell as Macaulay has done, but it
is not by chance that a man writes the best biography in the language.
He had some great and rare literary qualities. One was a clear and
vivid style, more flexible and Saxon than that of his great model.
Another was a remarkable discretion which hardly once permitted a fault
of taste in this whole enormous book where he must have had to pick his
steps with pitfalls on every side of him. They say that he was a fool
and a coxcomb in private life. He is never so with a pen in his hand.
Of all his numerous arguments with Johnson, where he ventured some
little squeak of remonstrance, before the roaring “No, sir!” came to
silence him, there are few in which his views were not, as experience
proved, the wiser. On the question of slavery he was in the wrong. But
I could quote from memory at least a dozen cases, including such vital
subjects as the American Revolution, the Hanoverian Dynasty, Religious
Toleration, and so on, where Boswell’s views were those which survived.

But where he excels as a biographer is in telling you just those little
things that you want to know. How often you read the life of a man and
are left without the remotest idea of his personality. It is not so
here. The man lives again. There is a short description of Johnson’s
person—it is not in the Life, but in the Tour to the Hebrides, the very
next book upon the shelf, which is typical of his vivid portraiture.
May I take it down, and read you a paragraph of it?—

“His person was large, robust, I may say approaching to the gigantic,
and grown unwieldy from corpulency. His countenance was naturally of
the cast of an ancient statue, but somewhat disfigured by the scars of
King’s evil. He was now in his sixty-fourth year and was become a
little dull of hearing. His sight had always been somewhat weak, yet so
much does mind govern and even supply the deficiencies of organs that
his perceptions were uncommonly quick and accurate. His head, and
sometimes also his body, shook with a kind of motion like the effect of
palsy. He appeared to be frequently disturbed by cramps or convulsive
contractions of the nature of that distemper called St. Vitus’ dance.
He wore a full suit of plain brown clothes, with twisted hair buttons
of the same colour, a large bushy greyish wig, a plain shirt, black
worsted stockings and silver buckles. Upon this tour when journeying he
wore boots and a very wide brown cloth great-coat with pockets which
might almost have held the two volumes of his folio dictionary, and he
carried in his hand a large English oak stick.”

You must admit that if one cannot reconstruct the great Samuel after
that it is not Mr. Boswell’s fault—and it is but one of a dozen equally
vivid glimpses which he gives us of his hero. It is just these
pen-pictures of his of the big, uncouth man, with his grunts and his
groans, his Gargantuan appetite, his twenty cups of tea, and his tricks
with the orange-peel and the lamp-posts, which fascinate the reader,
and have given Johnson a far broader literary vogue than his writings
could have done.

For, after all, which of those writings can be said to have any life
to-day? Not “Rasselas,” surely—that stilted romance. “The Lives of the
Poets” are but a succession of prefaces, and the “Ramblers” of
ephemeral essays. There is the monstrous drudgery of the Dictionary, a
huge piece of spadework, a monument to industry, but inconceivable to
genius. “London” has a few vigorous lines, and the “Journey to the
Hebrides” some spirited pages. This, with a number of political and
other pamphlets, was the main output of his lifetime. Surely it must be
admitted that it is not enough to justify his predominant place in
English literature, and that we must turn to his humble, much-ridiculed
biographer for the real explanation.

And then there was his talk. What was it which gave it such
distinction? His clear-cut positiveness upon every subject. But this is
a sign of a narrow finality—impossible to the man of sympathy and of
imagination, who sees the other side of every question and understands
what a little island the greatest human knowledge must be in the ocean
of infinite possibilities which surround us. Look at the results. Did
ever any single man, the very dullest of the race, stand convicted of
so many incredible blunders? It recalls the remark of Bagehot, that if
at any time the views of the most learned could be stamped upon the
whole human race the result would be to propagate the most absurd
errors. He was asked what became of swallows in the winter. Rolling and
wheezing, the oracle answered: “Swallows,” said he, “certainly sleep
all the winter. A number of them conglobulate together by flying round
and round, and then all in a heap throw themselves under water and lie
in the bed of a river.” Boswell gravely dockets the information.
However, if I remember right, even so sound a naturalist as White of
Selborne had his doubts about the swallows. More wonderful are
Johnson’s misjudgments of his fellow-authors. There, if anywhere, one
would have expected to find a sense of proportion. Yet his conclusions
would seem monstrous to a modern taste. “Shakespeare,” he said, “never
wrote six consecutive good lines.” He would only admit two good verses
in Gray’s exquisite “Elegy written in a Country Churchyard,” where it
would take a very acid critic to find two bad ones. “Tristram Shandy”
would not live. “Hamlet” was gabble. Swift’s “Gulliver’s Travels” was
poor stuff, and he never wrote anything good except “A Tale of a Tub.”
Voltaire was illiterate. Rousseau was a scoundrel. Deists, like Hume,
Priestley, or Gibbon, could not be honest men.

And his political opinions! They sound now like a caricature. I suppose
even in those days they were reactionary. “A poor man has no honour.”
“Charles the Second was a good King.” “Governments should turn out of
the Civil Service all who were on the other side.” “Judges in India
should be encouraged to trade.” “No country is the richer on account of
trade.” (I wonder if Adam Smith was in the company when this
proposition was laid down!) “A landed proprietor should turn out those
tenants who did not vote as he wished.” “It is not good for a labourer
to have his wages raised.” “When the balance of trade is against a
country, the margin _must_ be paid in current coin.” Those were a few
of his convictions.

And then his prejudices! Most of us have some unreasoning aversion. In
our more generous moments we are not proud of it. But consider those of
Johnson! When they were all eliminated there was not so very much left.
He hated Whigs. He disliked Scotsmen. He detested Nonconformists (a
young lady who joined them was “an odious wench”). He loathed
Americans. So he walked his narrow line, belching fire and fury at
everything to the right or the left of it. Macaulay’s posthumous
admiration is all very well, but had they met in life Macaulay would
have contrived to unite under one hat nearly everything that Johnson
abominated.

It cannot be said that these prejudices were founded on any strong
principle, or that they could not be altered where his own personal
interests demanded it. This is one of the weak points of his record. In
his dictionary he abused pensions and pensioners as a means by which
the State imposed slavery upon hirelings. When he wrote the unfortunate
definition a pension must have seemed a most improbable contingency,
but when George III., either through policy or charity, offered him one
a little later, he made no hesitation in accepting it. One would have
liked to feel that the violent expression of his convictions
represented a real intensity of feeling, but the facts in this instance
seem against it.

He was a great talker—but his talk was more properly a monologue. It
was a discursive essay, with perhaps a few marginal notes from his
subdued audience. How could one talk on equal terms with a man who
could not brook contradiction or even argument upon the most vital
questions in life? Would Goldsmith defend his literary views, or Burke
his Whiggism, or Gibbon his Deism? There was no common ground of
philosophic toleration on which one could stand. If he could not argue
he would be rude, or, as Goldsmith put it: “If his pistol missed fire,
he would knock you down with the butt end.” In the face of that
“rhinoceros laugh” there was an end of gentle argument. Napoleon said
that all the other kings would say “Ouf!” when they heard he was dead,
and so I cannot help thinking that the older men of Johnson’s circle
must have given a sigh of relief when at last they could speak freely
on that which was near their hearts, without the danger of a scene
where “Why, no, sir!” was very likely to ripen into “Let us have no
more on’t!” Certainly one would like to get behind Boswell’s account,
and to hear a chat between such men as Burke and Reynolds, as to the
difference in the freedom and atmosphere of the Club on an evening when
the formidable Doctor was not there, as compared to one when he was.

No smallest estimate of his character is fair which does not make due
allowance for the terrible experiences of his youth and early middle
age. His spirit was as scarred as his face. He was fifty-three when the
pension was given him, and up to then his existence had been spent in
one constant struggle for the first necessities of life, for the daily
meal and the nightly bed. He had seen his comrades of letters die of
actual privation. From childhood he had known no happiness. The half
blind gawky youth, with dirty linen and twitching limbs, had always,
whether in the streets of Lichfield, the quadrangle of Pembroke, or the
coffee-houses of London, been an object of mingled pity and amusement.
With a proud and sensitive soul, every day of his life must have
brought some bitter humiliation. Such an experience must either break a
man’s spirit or embitter it, and here, no doubt, was the secret of that
roughness, that carelessness for the sensibilities of others, which
caused Boswell’s father to christen him “Ursa Major.” If his nature was
in any way warped, it must be admitted that terrific forces had gone to
the rending of it. His good was innate, his evil the result of a
dreadful experience.

And he had some great qualities. Memory was the chief of them. He had
read omnivorously, and all that he had read he remembered, not merely
in the vague, general way in which we remember what we read, but with
every particular of place and date. If it were poetry, he could quote
it by the page, Latin or English. Such a memory has its enormous
advantage, but it carries with it its corresponding defect. With the
mind so crammed with other people’s goods, how can you have room for
any fresh manufactures of your own? A great memory is, I think, often
fatal to originality, in spite of Scott and some other exceptions. The
slate must be clear before you put your own writing upon it. When did
Johnson ever discover an original thought, when did he ever reach
forward into the future, or throw any fresh light upon those enigmas
with which mankind is faced? Overloaded with the past, he had space for
nothing else. Modern developments of every sort cast no first herald
rays upon his mind. He journeyed in France a few years before the
greatest cataclysm that the world has ever known, and his mind,
arrested by much that was trivial, never once responded to the
storm-signals which must surely have been visible around him. We read
that an amiable Monsieur Sansterre showed him over his brewery and
supplied him with statistics as to his output of beer. It was the same
foul-mouthed Sansterre who struck up the drums to drown Louis’ voice at
the scaffold. The association shows how near the unconscious sage was
to the edge of that precipice and how little his learning availed him
in discerning it.

He would have been a great lawyer or divine. Nothing, one would think,
could have kept him from Canterbury or from the Woolsack. In either
case his memory, his learning, his dignity, and his inherent sense of
piety and justice, would have sent him straight to the top. His brain,
working within its own limitations, was remarkable. There is no more
wonderful proof of this than his opinions on questions of Scotch law,
as given to Boswell and as used by the latter before the Scotch judges.
That an outsider with no special training should at short notice write
such weighty opinions, crammed with argument and reason, is, I think,
as remarkable a _tour de force_ as literature can show.

Above all, he really was a very kind-hearted man, and that must count
for much. His was a large charity, and it came from a small purse. The
rooms of his house became a sort of harbour of refuge in which several
strange battered hulks found their last moorings. There were the blind
Mr. Levett, and the acidulous Mrs. Williams, and the colourless Mrs. De
Moulins, all old and ailing—a trying group amid which to spend one’s
days. His guinea was always ready for the poor acquaintance, and no
poet was so humble that he might not preface his book with a dedication
whose ponderous and sonorous sentences bore the hall-mark of their
maker. It is the rough, kindly man, the man who bore the poor
street-walker home upon his shoulders, who makes one forget, or at
least forgive, the dogmatic pedantic Doctor of the Club.

There is always to me something of interest in the view which a great
man takes of old age and death. It is the practical test of how far the
philosophy of his life has been a sound one. Hume saw death afar, and
met it with unostentatious calm. Johnson’s mind flinched from that
dread opponent. His letters and his talk during his latter years are
one long cry of fear. It was not cowardice, for physically he was one
of the most stout-hearted men that ever lived. There were no limits to
his courage. It was spiritual diffidence, coupled with an actual belief
in the possibilities of the other world, which a more humane and
liberal theology has done something to soften. How strange to see him
cling so desperately to that crazy body, with its gout, its asthma, its
St. Vitus’ dance, and its six gallons of dropsy! What could be the
attraction of an existence where eight hours of every day were spent
groaning in a chair, and sixteen wheezing in a bed? “I would give one
of these legs,” said he, “for another year of life.” None the less,
when the hour did at last strike, no man could have borne himself with
more simple dignity and courage. Say what you will of him, and resent
him how you may, you can never open those four grey volumes without
getting some mental stimulus, some desire for wider reading, some
insight into human learning or character, which should leave you a
better and a wiser man.




IV.


Next to my Johnsoniana are my Gibbons—two editions, if you please, for
my old complete one being somewhat crabbed in the print I could not
resist getting a set of Bury’s new six-volume presentment of the
History. In reading that book you don’t want to be handicapped in any
way. You want fair type, clear paper, and a light volume. You are not
to read it lightly, but with some earnestness of purpose and keenness
for knowledge, with a classical atlas at your elbow and a note-book
hard by, taking easy stages and harking back every now and then to keep
your grip of the past and to link it up with what follows. There are no
thrills in it. You won’t be kept out of your bed at night, nor will you
forget your appointments during the day, but you will feel a certain
sedate pleasure in the doing of it, and when it is done you will have
gained something which you can never lose—something solid, something
definite, something that will make you broader and deeper than before.

Were I condemned to spend a year upon a desert island and allowed only
one book for my companion, it is certainly that which I should choose.
For consider how enormous is its scope, and what food for thought is
contained within those volumes. It covers a thousand years of the
world’s history, it is full and good and accurate, its standpoint is
broadly philosophic, its style dignified. With our more elastic methods
we may consider his manner pompous, but he lived in an age when
Johnson’s turgid periods had corrupted our literature. For my own part
I do not dislike Gibbon’s pomposity. A paragraph should be measured and
sonorous if it ventures to describe the advance of a Roman legion, or
the debate of a Greek Senate. You are wafted upwards, with this lucid
and just spirit by your side upholding and instructing you. Beneath you
are warring nations, the clash of races, the rise and fall of
dynasties, the conflict of creeds. Serene you float above them all, and
ever as the panorama flows past, the weighty measured unemotional voice
whispers the true meaning of the scene into your ear.

It is a most mighty story that is told. You begin with a description of
the state of the Roman Empire when the early Caesars were on the
throne, and when it was undisputed mistress of the world. You pass down
the line of the Emperors with their strange alternations of greatness
and profligacy, descending occasionally to criminal lunacy. When the
Empire went rotten it began at the top, and it took centuries to
corrupt the man behind the spear. Neither did a religion of peace
affect him much, for, in spite of the adoption of Christianity, Roman
history was still written in blood. The new creed had only added a
fresh cause of quarrel and violence to the many which already existed,
and the wars of angry nations were mild compared to those of excited
sectaries.

Then came the mighty rushing wind from without, blowing from the waste
places of the world, destroying, confounding, whirling madly through
the old order, leaving broken chaos behind it, but finally cleansing
and purifying that which was stale and corrupt. A storm-centre
somewhere in the north of China did suddenly what it may very well do
again. The human volcano blew its top off, and Europe was covered by
the destructive debris. The absurd point is that it was not the
conquerors who overran the Roman Empire, but it was the terrified
fugitives, who, like a drove of stampeded cattle, blundered over
everything which barred their way. It was a wild, dramatic time—the
time of the formation of the modern races of Europe. The nations came
whirling in out of the north and east like dust-storms, and amid the
seeming chaos each was blended with its neighbour so as to toughen the
fibre of the whole. The fickle Gaul got his steadying from the Franks,
the steady Saxon got his touch of refinement from the Norman, the
Italian got a fresh lease of life from the Lombard and the Ostrogoth,
the corrupt Greek made way for the manly and earnest Mahommedan.
Everywhere one seems to see a great hand blending the seeds. And so one
can now, save only that emigration has taken the place of war. It does
not, for example, take much prophetic power to say that something very
great is being built up on the other side of the Atlantic. When on an
Anglo-Celtic basis you see the Italian, the Hun, and the Scandinavian
being added, you feel that there is no human quality which may not be
thereby evolved.

But to revert to Gibbon: the next stage is the flight of Empire from
Rome to Byzantium, even as the Anglo-Celtic power might find its centre
some day not in London but in Chicago or Toronto. There is the whole
strange story of the tidal wave of Mahommedanism from the south,
submerging all North Africa, spreading right and left to India on the
one side and to Spain on the other, finally washing right over the
walls of Byzantium until it, the bulwark of Christianity, became what
it is now, the advanced European fortress of the Moslem. Such is the
tremendous narrative covering half the world’s known history, which can
all be acquired and made part of yourself by the aid of that humble
atlas, pencil, and note-book already recommended.

When all is so interesting it is hard to pick examples, but to me there
has always seemed to be something peculiarly impressive in the first
entrance of a new race on to the stage of history. It has something of
the glamour which hangs round the early youth of a great man. You
remember how the Russians made their debut—came down the great rivers
and appeared at the Bosphorus in two hundred canoes, from which they
endeavoured to board the Imperial galleys. Singular that a thousand
years have passed and that the ambition of the Russians is still to
carry out the task at which their skin-clad ancestors failed. Or the
Turks again; you may recall the characteristic ferocity with which they
opened their career. A handful of them were on some mission to the
Emperor. The town was besieged from the landward side by the
barbarians, and the Asiatics obtained leave to take part in a skirmish.
The first Turk galloped out, shot a barbarian with his arrow, and then,
lying down beside him, proceeded to suck his blood, which so horrified
the man’s comrades that they could not be brought to face such uncanny
adversaries. So, from opposite sides, those two great races arrived at
the city which was to be the stronghold of the one and the ambition of
the other for so many centuries.

And then, even more interesting than the races which arrive are those
that disappear. There is something there which appeals most powerfully
to the imagination. Take, for example, the fate of those Vandals who
conquered the north of Africa. They were a German tribe, blue-eyed and
flaxen-haired, from somewhere in the Elbe country. Suddenly they, too,
were seized with the strange wandering madness which was epidemic at
the time. Away they went on the line of least resistance, which is
always from north to south and from east to west. South-west was the
course of the Vandals—a course which must have been continued through
pure love of adventure, since in the thousands of miles which they
traversed there were many fair resting-places, if that were only their
quest.

They crossed the south of France, conquered Spain, and, finally, the
more adventurous passed over into Africa, where they occupied the old
Roman province. For two or three generations they held it, much as the
English hold India, and their numbers were at the least some hundreds
of thousands. Presently the Roman Empire gave one of those flickers
which showed that there was still some fire among the ashes. Belisarius
landed in Africa and reconquered the province. The Vandals were cut off
from the sea and fled inland. Whither did they carry those blue eyes
and that flaxen hair? Were they exterminated by the negroes, or did
they amalgamate with them? Travellers have brought back stories from
the Mountains of the Moon of a Negroid race with light eyes and hair.
Is it possible that here we have some trace of the vanished Germans?

It recalls the parallel case of the lost settlements in Greenland. That
also has always seemed to me to be one of the most romantic questions
in history—the more so, perhaps, as I have strained my eyes to see
across the ice-floes the Greenland coast at the point (or near it)
where the old “Eyrbyggia” must have stood. That was the Scandinavian
city, founded by colonists from Iceland, which grew to be a
considerable place, so much so that they sent to Denmark for a bishop.
That would be in the fourteenth century. The bishop, coming out to his
see, found that he was unable to reach it on account of a climatic
change which had brought down the ice and filled the strait between
Iceland and Greenland. From that day to this no one has been able to
say what has become of these old Scandinavians, who were at the time,
be it remembered, the most civilized and advanced race in Europe. They
may have been overwhelmed by the Esquimaux, the despised Skroeling—or
they may have amalgamated with them—or conceivably they might have held
their own. Very little is known yet of that portion of the coast. It
would be strange if some Nansen or Peary were to stumble upon the
remains of the old colony, and find possibly in that antiseptic
atmosphere a complete mummy of some bygone civilization.

But once more to return to Gibbon. What a mind it must have been which
first planned, and then, with the incessant labour of twenty years,
carried out that enormous work! There was no classical author so little
known, no Byzantine historian so diffuse, no monkish chronicle so
crabbed, that they were not assimilated and worked into their
appropriate place in the huge framework. Great application, great
perseverance, great attention to detail was needed in all this, but the
coral polyp has all those qualities, and somehow in the heart of his
own creation the individuality of the man himself becomes as
insignificant and as much overlooked as that of the little creature
that builds the reef. A thousand know Gibbon’s work for one who cares
anything for Gibbon.

And on the whole this is justified by the facts. Some men are greater
than their work. Their work only represents one facet of their
character, and there may be a dozen others, all remarkable, and uniting
to make one complex and unique creature. It was not so with Gibbon. He
was a cold-blooded man, with a brain which seemed to have grown at the
expense of his heart. I cannot recall in his life one generous impulse,
one ardent enthusiasm, save for the Classics. His excellent judgment
was never clouded by the haze of human emotion—or, at least, it was
such an emotion as was well under the control of his will. Could
anything be more laudable—or less lovable? He abandons his girl at the
order of his father, and sums it up that he “sighs as a lover but obeys
as a son.” The father dies, and he records the fact with the remark
that “the tears of a son are seldom lasting.” The terrible spectacle of
the French Revolution excited in his mind only a feeling of self-pity
because his retreat in Switzerland was invaded by the unhappy refugees,
just as a grumpy country gentleman in England might complain that he
was annoyed by the trippers. There is a touch of dislike in all the
allusions which Boswell makes to Gibbon—often without even mentioning
his name—and one cannot read the great historian’s life without
understanding why.

I should think that few men have been born with the material for
self-sufficient contentment more completely within himself than Edward
Gibbon. He had every gift which a great scholar should have, an
insatiable thirst for learning in every form, immense industry, a
retentive memory, and that broadly philosophic temperament which
enables a man to rise above the partisan and to become the impartial
critic of human affairs. It is true that at the time he was looked upon
as bitterly prejudiced in the matter of religious thought, but his
views are familiar to modern philosophy, and would shock no
susceptibilities in these more liberal (and more virtuous) days. Turn
him up in that Encyclopedia, and see what the latest word is upon his
contentions. “Upon the famous fifteenth and sixteenth chapters it is
not necessary to dwell,” says the biographer, “because at this time of
day no Christian apologist dreams of denying the substantial truth of
any of the more important allegations of Gibbon. Christians may
complain of the suppression of some circumstances which might influence
the general result, and they must remonstrate against the unfair
construction of their case. But they no longer refuse to hear any
reasonable evidence tending to show that persecution was less severe
than had been once believed, and they have slowly learned that they can
afford to concede the validity of all the secondary causes assigned by
Gibbon and even of others still more discreditable. The fact is, as the
historian has again and again admitted, that his account of the
secondary causes which contributed to the progress and establishment of
Christianity leaves the question as to the natural or supernatural
origin of Christianity practically untouched.” This is all very well,
but in that case how about the century of abuse which has been showered
upon the historian? Some posthumous apology would seem to be called
for.

Physically, Gibbon was as small as Johnson was large, but there was a
curious affinity in their bodily ailments. Johnson, as a youth, was
ulcerated and tortured by the king’s evil, in spite of the Royal touch.
Gibbon gives us a concise but lurid account of his own boyhood.

“I was successively afflicted by lethargies and fevers, by opposite
tendencies to a consumptive and dropsical habit, by a contraction of my
nerves, a fistula in my eye, and the bite of a dog, most vehemently
suspected of madness. Every practitioner was called to my aid, the fees
of the doctors were swelled by the bills of the apothecaries and
surgeons. There was a time when I swallowed more physic than food, and
my body is still marked by the indelible scars of lancets, issues, and
caustics.”

Such is his melancholy report. The fact is that the England of that day
seems to have been very full of that hereditary form of chronic
ill-health which we call by the general name of struma. How far the
hard-drinking habits in vogue for a century or so before had anything
to do with it I cannot say, nor can I trace a connection between struma
and learning; but one has only to compare this account of Gibbon with
Johnson’s nervous twitches, his scarred face and his St. Vitus’ dance,
to realize that these, the two most solid English writers of their
generation, were each heir to the same gruesome inheritance.

I wonder if there is any picture extant of Gibbon in the character of
subaltern in the South Hampshire Militia? With his small frame, his
huge head, his round, chubby face, and the pretentious uniform, he must
have looked a most extraordinary figure. Never was there so round a peg
in a square hole! His father, a man of a very different type, held a
commission, and this led to poor Gibbon becoming a soldier in spite of
himself. War had broken out, the regiment was mustered, and the
unfortunate student, to his own utter dismay, was kept under arms until
the conclusion of hostilities. For three years he was divorced from his
books, and loudly and bitterly did he resent it. The South Hampshire
Militia never saw the enemy, which is perhaps as well for them. Even
Gibbon himself pokes fun at them; but after three years under canvas it
is probable that his men had more cause to smile at their book-worm
captain than he at his men. His hand closed much more readily on a
pen-handle than on a sword-hilt. In his lament, one of the items is
that his colonel’s example encouraged the daily practice of hard and
even excessive drinking, which gave him the gout. “The loss of so many
busy and idle hours were not compensated for by any elegant pleasure,”
says he; “and my temper was insensibly soured by the society of rustic
officers, who were alike deficient in the knowledge of scholars and the
manners of gentlemen.” The picture of Gibbon flushed with wine at the
mess-table, with these hard-drinking squires around him, must certainly
have been a curious one. He admits, however, that he found consolations
as well as hardships in his spell of soldiering. It made him an
Englishman once more, it improved his health, it changed the current of
his thoughts. It was even useful to him as an historian. In a
celebrated and characteristic sentence, he says, “The discipline and
evolutions of a modern battalion gave me a clearer notion of the
Phalanx and the Legions, and the captain of the Hampshire Grenadiers
has not been useless to the historian of the Roman Empire.”

If we don’t know all about Gibbon it is not his fault, for he wrote no
fewer than six accounts of his own career, each differing from the
other, and all equally bad. A man must have more heart and soul than
Gibbon to write a good autobiography. It is the most difficult of all
human compositions, calling for a mixture of tact, discretion, and
frankness which make an almost impossible blend. Gibbon, in spite of
his foreign education, was a very typical Englishman in many ways, with
the reticence, self-respect, and self-consciousness of the race. No
British autobiography has ever been frank, and consequently no British
autobiography has ever been good. Trollope’s, perhaps, is as good as
any that I know, but of all forms of literature it is the one least
adapted to the national genius. You could not imagine a British
Rousseau, still less a British Benvenuto Cellini. In one way it is to
the credit of the race that it should be so. If we do as much evil as
our neighbours we at least have grace enough to be ashamed of it and to
suppress its publication.

There on the left of Gibbon is my fine edition (Lord Braybrooke’s) of
Pepys’ Diary. That is, in truth, the greatest autobiography in our
language, and yet it was not deliberately written as such. When Mr.
Pepys jotted down from day to day every quaint or mean thought which
came into his head he would have been very much surprised had any one
told him that he was doing a work quite unique in our literature. Yet
his involuntary autobiography, compiled for some obscure reason or for
private reference, but certainly never meant for publication, is as
much the first in that line of literature as Boswell’s book among
biographies or Gibbon’s among histories.

As a race we are too afraid of giving ourselves away ever to produce a
good autobiography. We resent the charge of national hypocrisy, and yet
of all nations we are the least frank as to our own emotions—especially
on certain sides of them. Those affairs of the heart, for example,
which are such an index to a man’s character, and so profoundly modify
his life—what space do they fill in any man’s autobiography? Perhaps in
Gibbon’s case the omission matters little, for, save in the instance of
his well-controlled passion for the future Madame Neckar, his heart was
never an organ which gave him much trouble. The fact is that when the
British author tells his own story he tries to make himself
respectable, and the more respectable a man is the less interesting
does he become. Rousseau may prove himself a maudlin degenerate.
Cellini may stand self-convicted as an amorous ruffian. If they are not
respectable they are thoroughly human and interesting all the same.

The wonderful thing about Mr. Pepys is that a man should succeed in
making himself seem so insignificant when really he must have been a
man of considerable character and attainments. Who would guess it who
read all these trivial comments, these catalogues of what he had for
dinner, these inane domestic confidences—all the more interesting for
their inanity! The effect left upon the mind is of some grotesque
character in a play, fussy, self-conscious, blustering with women,
timid with men, dress-proud, purse-proud, trimming in politics and in
religion, a garrulous gossip immersed always in trifles. And yet,
though this was the day-by-day man, the year-by-year man was a very
different person, a devoted civil servant, an eloquent orator, an
excellent writer, a capable musician, and a ripe scholar who
accumulated 3000 volumes—a large private library in those days—and had
the public spirit to leave them all to his University. You can forgive
old Pepys a good deal of his philandering when you remember that he was
the only official of the Navy Office who stuck to his post during the
worst days of the Plague. He may have been—indeed, he assuredly was—a
coward, but the coward who has sense of duty enough to overcome his
cowardice is the most truly brave of mankind.

But the one amazing thing which will never be explained about Pepys is
what on earth induced him to go to the incredible labour of writing
down in shorthand cipher not only all the trivialities of his life, but
even his own very gross delinquencies which any other man would have
been only too glad to forget. The Diary was kept for about ten years,
and was abandoned because the strain upon his eyes of the crabbed
shorthand was helping to destroy his sight. I suppose that he became so
familiar with it that he wrote it and read it as easily as he did
ordinary script. But even so, it was a huge labour to compile these
books of strange manuscript. Was it an effort to leave some memorial of
his own existence to single him out from all the countless sons of men?
In such a case he would assuredly have left directions in somebody’s
care with a reference to it in the deed by which he bequeathed his
library to Cambridge. In that way he could have ensured having his
Diary read at any date he chose to name after his death. But no
allusion to it was left, and if it had not been for the ingenuity and
perseverance of a single scholar the dusty volumes would still lie
unread in some top shelf of the Pepysian Library. Publicity, then, was
not his object. What could it have been? The only alternative is
reference and self-information. You will observe in his character a
curious vein of method and order, by which he loved, to be for ever
estimating his exact wealth, cataloguing his books, or scheduling his
possessions. It is conceivable that this systematic recording of his
deeds—even of his misdeeds—was in some sort analogous, sprung from a
morbid tidiness of mind. It may be a weak explanation, but it is
difficult to advance another one.

One minor point which must strike the reader of Pepys is how musical a
nation the English of that day appear to have been. Every one seems to
have had command of some instrument, many of several. Part-singing was
common. There is not much of Charles the Second’s days which we need
envy, but there, at least, they seem to have had the advantage of us.
It was real music, too—music of dignity and tenderness—with words which
were worthy of such treatment. This cult may have been the last remains
of those mediaeval pre-Reformation days when the English Church choirs
were, as I have read somewhere, the most famous in Europe. A strange
thing this for a land which in the whole of last century has produced
no single master of the first rank!

What national change is it which has driven music from the land? Has
life become so serious that song has passed out of it? In Southern
climes one hears poor folk sing for pure lightness of heart. In
England, alas, the sound of a poor man’s voice raised in song means
only too surely that he is drunk. And yet it is consoling to know that
the germ of the old powers is always there ready to sprout forth if
they be nourished and cultivated. If our cathedral choirs were the best
in the old Catholic days, it is equally true, I believe, that our
orchestral associations are now the best in Europe. So, at least, the
German papers said on the occasion of the recent visit of a north of
England choir. But one cannot read Pepys without knowing that the
general musical habit is much less cultivated now than of old.




V.


It is a long jump from Samuel Pepys to George Borrow—from one pole of
the human character to the other—and yet they are in contact on the
shelf of my favourite authors. There is something wonderful, I think,
about the land of Cornwall. That long peninsula extending out into the
ocean has caught all sorts of strange floating things, and has held
them there in isolation until they have woven themselves into the
texture of the Cornish race. What is this strange strain which lurks
down yonder and every now and then throws up a great man with singular
un-English ways and features for all the world to marvel at? It is not
Celtic, nor is it the dark old Iberian. Further and deeper lie the
springs. Is it not Semitic, Phoenician, the roving men of Tyre, with
noble Southern faces and Oriental imaginations, who have in far-off
days forgotten their blue Mediterranean and settled on the granite
shores of the Northern Sea?

Whence came the wonderful face and great personality of Henry Irving?
How strong, how beautiful, how un-Saxon it was! I only know that his
mother was a Cornish woman. Whence came the intense glowing imagination
of the Brontes—so unlike the Miss-Austen-like calm of their
predecessors? Again, I only know that their mother was a Cornish woman.
Whence came this huge elfin creature, George Borrow, with his eagle
head perched on his rocklike shoulders, brown-faced, white-headed, a
king among men? Where did he get that remarkable face, those strange
mental gifts, which place him by himself in literature? Once more, his
father was a Cornishman. Yes, there is something strange, and weird,
and great, lurking down yonder in the great peninsula which juts into
the western sea. Borrow may, if he so pleases, call himself an East
Anglian—“an English Englishman,” as he loved to term it—but is it a
coincidence that the one East Anglian born of Cornish blood was the one
who showed these strange qualities? The birth was accidental. The
qualities throw back to the twilight of the world.

There are some authors from whom I shrink because they are so
voluminous that I feel that, do what I may, I can never hope to be well
read in their works. Therefore, and very weakly, I avoid them
altogether. There is Balzac, for example, with his hundred odd volumes.
I am told that some of them are masterpieces and the rest pot-boilers,
but that no one is agreed which is which. Such an author makes an undue
claim upon the little span of mortal years. Because he asks too much
one is inclined to give him nothing at all. Dumas, too! I stand on the
edge of him, and look at that huge crop, and content myself with a
sample here and there. But no one could raise this objection to Borrow.
A month’s reading—even for a leisurely reader—will master all that he
has written. There are “Lavengro,” “The Bible in Spain,” “Romany Rye,”
and, finally, if you wish to go further, “Wild Wales.” Only four
books—not much to found a great reputation upon—but, then, there are no
other four books quite like them in the language.

He was a very strange man, bigoted, prejudiced, obstinate, inclined to
be sulky, as wayward as a man could be. So far his catalogue of
qualities does not seem to pick him as a winner. But he had one great
and rare gift. He preserved through all his days a sense of the great
wonder and mystery of life—the child sense which is so quickly dulled.
Not only did he retain it himself, but he was word-master enough to
make other people hark back to it also. As he writes you cannot help
seeing through his eyes, and nothing which his eyes saw or his ear
heard was ever dull or commonplace. It was all strange, mystic, with
some deeper meaning struggling always to the light. If he chronicled
his conversation with a washer-woman there was something arresting in
the words he said, something singular in her reply. If he met a man in
a public-house one felt, after reading his account, that one would wish
to know more of that man. If he approached a town he saw and made you
see—not a collection of commonplace houses or frowsy streets, but
something very strange and wonderful, the winding river, the noble
bridge, the old castle, the shadows of the dead. Every human being,
every object, was not so much a thing in itself, as a symbol and
reminder of the past. He looked through a man at that which the man
represented. Was his name Welsh? Then in an instant the individual is
forgotten and he is off, dragging you in his train, to ancient Britons,
intrusive Saxons, unheard-of bards, Owen Glendower, mountain raiders
and a thousand fascinating things. Or is it a Danish name? He leaves
the individual in all his modern commonplace while he flies off to huge
skulls at Hythe (in parenthesis I may remark that I have examined the
said skulls with some care, and they seemed to me to be rather below
the human average), to Vikings, Berserkers, Varangians, Harald
Haardraada, and the innate wickedness of the Pope. To Borrow all roads
lead to Rome.

But, my word, what English the fellow could write! What an organ-roll
he could get into his sentences! How nervous and vital and vivid it all
is!

There is music in every line of it if you have been blessed with an ear
for the music of prose. Take the chapter in “Lavengro” of how the
screaming horror came upon his spirit when he was encamped in the
Dingle. The man who wrote that has caught the true mantle of Bunyan and
Defoe. And, observe the art of it, under all the simplicity—notice, for
example, the curious weird effect produced by the studied repetition of
the word “dingle” coming ever round and round like the master-note in a
chime. Or take the passage about Britain towards the end of “The Bible
in Spain.” I hate quoting from these masterpieces, if only for the very
selfish reason that my poor setting cannot afford to show up
brilliants. None the less, cost what it may, let me transcribe that one
noble piece of impassioned prose—

“O England! long, long may it be ere the sun of thy glory sink beneath
the wave of darkness! Though gloomy and portentous clouds are now
gathering rapidly around thee, still, still may it please the Almighty
to disperse them, and to grant thee a futurity longer in duration and
still brighter in renown than thy past! Or, if thy doom be at hand, may
that doom be a noble one, and worthy of her who has been styled the Old
Queen of the waters! May thou sink, if thou dost sink, amidst blood and
flame, with a mighty noise, causing more than one nation to participate
in thy downfall! Of all fates, may it please the Lord to preserve thee
from a disgraceful and a slow decay; becoming, ere extinct, a scorn and
a mockery for those self-same foes who now, though they envy and abhor
thee, still fear thee, nay even against their will, honour and respect
thee…. Remove from thee the false prophets, who have seen vanity and
divined lies; who have daubed thy wall with untempered mortar, that it
may fall; who see visions of peace where there is no peace; who have
strengthened the hands of the wicked, and made the heart of the
righteous sad. Oh, do this, and fear not the result, for either shall
thy end be a majestic and an enviable one; or God shall perpetuate thy
reign upon the waters, thou Old Queen!”

Or take the fight with the Flaming Tinman. It’s too long for
quotation—but read it, read every word of it. Where in the language can
you find a stronger, more condensed and more restrained narrative? I
have seen with my own eyes many a noble fight, more than one
international battle, where the best of two great countries have been
pitted against each other—yet the second-hand impression of Borrow’s
description leaves a more vivid remembrance upon my mind than any of
them. This is the real witchcraft of letters.

He was a great fighter himself. He has left a secure reputation in
other than literary circles—circles which would have been amazed to
learn that he was a writer of books. With his natural advantages, his
six foot three of height and his staglike agility, he could hardly fail
to be formidable. But he was a scientific sparrer as well, though he
had, I have been told, a curious sprawling fashion of his own. And how
his heart was in it—how he loved the fighting men! You remember his
thumb-nail sketches of his heroes. If you don’t I must quote one, and
if you do you will be glad to read it again—

“There’s Cribb, the Champion of England, and perhaps the best man in
England; there he is, with his huge, massive figure, and face
wonderfully like that of a lion. There is Belcher, the younger, not the
mighty one, who is gone to his place, but the Teucer Belcher, the most
scientific pugilist that ever entered a ring, only wanting strength to
be I won’t say what. He appears to walk before me now, as he did that
evening, with his white hat, white great coat, thin genteel figure,
springy step, and keen determined eye. Crosses him, what a contrast!
Grim, savage Shelton, who has a civil word for nobody, and a hard blow
for anybody. Hard! One blow given with the proper play of his athletic
arm will unsense a giant. Yonder individual, who strolls about with his
hands behind him, supporting his brown coat lappets, undersized, and
who looks anything but what he is, is the king of the light-weights,
so-called—Randall! The terrible Randall, who has Irish blood in his
veins; not the better for that, nor the worse; and not far from him is
his last antagonist, Ned Turner, who, though beaten by him, still
thinks himself as good a man, in which he is, perhaps, right, for it
was a near thing. But how shall I name them all? They were there by
dozens, and all tremendous in their way. There was Bulldog Hudson, and
fearless Scroggins, who beat the conqueror of Sam the Jew. There was
Black Richmond—no, he was not there, but I knew him well; he was the
most dangerous of blacks, even with a broken thigh. There was Purcell,
who could never conquer until all seemed over with him. There was—what!
shall I name thee last? Ay, why not? I believe that thou art the last
of all that strong family still above the sod, where mayst thou long
continue—true piece of English stuff—Tom of Bedford. Hail to thee, Tom
of Bedford, or by whatever name it may please thee to be called, Spring
or Winter! Hail to thee, six-foot Englishman of the brown eye, worthy
to have carried a six-foot bow at Flodden, where England’s yeomen
triumphed over Scotland’s King, his clans and chivalry. Hail to thee,
last of English bruisers, after all the many victories which thou hast
achieved—true English victories, unbought by yellow gold.”

Those are words from the heart. Long may it be before we lose the
fighting blood which has come to us from of old! In a world of peace we
shall at last be able to root it from our natures. In a world which is
armed to the teeth it is the last and only guarantee of our future.
Neither our numbers, nor our wealth, nor the waters which guard us can
hold us safe if once the old iron passes from our spirit. Barbarous,
perhaps—but there are possibilities for barbarism, and none in this
wide world for effeminacy.

Borrow’s views of literature and of literary men were curious.
Publisher and brother author, he hated them with a fine comprehensive
hatred. In all his books I cannot recall a word of commendation to any
living writer, nor has he posthumous praise for those of the generation
immediately preceding. Southey, indeed, he commends with what most
would regard as exaggerated warmth, but for the rest he who lived when
Dickens, Thackeray, and Tennyson were all in their glorious prime,
looks fixedly past them at some obscure Dane or forgotten Welshman. The
reason was, I expect, that his proud soul was bitterly wounded by his
own early failures and slow recognition. He knew himself to be a chief
in the clan, and when the clan heeded him not he withdrew in haughty
disdain. Look at his proud, sensitive face and you hold the key to his
life.

Harking back and talking of pugilism, I recall an incident which gave
me pleasure. A friend of mine read a pugilistic novel called “Rodney
Stone” to a famous Australian prize-fighter, stretched upon a bed of
mortal sickness. The dying gladiator listened with intent interest but
keen, professional criticism to the combats of the novel. The reader
had got to the point where the young amateur fights the brutal Berks.
Berks is winded, but holds his adversary off with a stiff left arm. The
amateur’s second in the story, an old prize-fighter, shouts some advice
to him as to how to deal with the situation. “That’s right. By —— he’s
got him!” yelled the stricken man in the bed. Who cares for critics
after that?

You can see my own devotion to the ring in that trio of brown volumes
which stand, appropriately enough, upon the flank of Borrow. They are
the three volumes of “Pugilistica,” given me years ago by my old
friend, Robert Barr, a mine in which you can never pick for half an
hour without striking it rich. Alas! for the horrible slang of those
days, the vapid witless Corinthian talk, with its ogles and its fogles,
its pointless jokes, its maddening habit of italicizing a word or two
in every sentence. Even these stern and desperate encounters, fit
sports for the men of Albuera and Waterloo, become dull and vulgar, in
that dreadful jargon. You have to turn to Hazlitt’s account of the
encounter between the Gasman and the Bristol Bull, to feel the savage
strength of it all. It is a hardened reader who does not wince even in
print before that frightful right-hander which felled the giant, and
left him in “red ruin” from eyebrow to jaw. But even if there be no
Hazlitt present to describe such a combat it is a poor imagination
which is not fired by the deeds of the humble heroes who lived once so
vividly upon earth, and now only appeal to faithful ones in these
little-read pages. They were picturesque creatures, men of great force
of character and will, who reached the limits of human bravery and
endurance. There is Jackson on the cover, gold upon brown, “gentleman
Jackson,” Jackson of the balustrade calf and the noble head, who wrote
his name with an 88-pound weight dangling from his little finger.

Here is a pen-portrait of him by one who knew him well—

“I can see him now as I saw him in ’84 walking down Holborn Hill,
towards Smithfield. He had on a scarlet coat worked in gold at the
buttonholes, ruffles and frill of fine lace, a small white stock, no
collar (they were not then invented), a looped hat with a broad black
band, buff knee-breeches and long silk strings, striped white silk
stockings, pumps and paste buckles; his waistcoat was pale blue satin,
sprigged with white. It was impossible to look on his fine ample chest,
his noble shoulders, his waist (if anything too small), his large but
not too large hips, his balustrade calf and beautifully turned but not
over delicate ankle, his firm foot and peculiarly small hand, without
thinking that nature had sent him on earth as a model. On he went at a
good five miles and a half an hour, the envy of all men and the
admiration of all women.”

Now, that is a discriminating portrait—a portrait which really helps
you to see that which the writer sets out to describe. After reading it
one can understand why even in reminiscent sporting descriptions of
those old days, amid all the Tonis and Bills and Jacks, it is always
Mr. John Jackson. He was the friend and instructor of Byron and of half
the bloods in town. Jackson it was who, in the heat of combat, seized
the Jew Mendoza by the hair, and so ensured that the pugs for ever
afterwards should be a close-cropped race. Inside you see the square
face of old Broughton, the supreme fighting man of the eighteenth
century, the man whose humble ambition it was to begin with the pivot
man of the Prussian Guard, and work his way through the regiment. He
had a chronicler, the good Captain Godfrey, who has written some
English which would take some beating. How about this passage?—

“He stops as regularly as the swordsman, and carries his blows truly in
the line; he steps not back distrusting of himself, to stop a blow, and
puddle in the return, with an arm unaided by his body, producing but
fly-flap blows. No! Broughton steps boldly and firmly in, bids a
welcome to the coming blow; receives it with his guardian arm; then,
with a general summons of his swelling muscles, and his firm body
seconding his arm, and supplying it with all its weight, pours the
pile-driving force upon his man.”

One would like a little more from the gallant Captain. Poor Broughton!
He fought once too often. “Why, damn you, you’re beat!” cried the Royal
Duke. “Not beat, your highness, but I can’t see my man!” cried the
blinded old hero. Alas, there is the tragedy of the ring as it is of
life! The wave of youth surges ever upwards, and the wave that went
before is swept sobbing on to the shingle. “Youth will be served,” said
the terse old pugs. But what so sad as the downfall of the old
champion! Wise Tom Spring—Tom of Bedford, as Borrow calls him—had the
wit to leave the ring unconquered in the prime of his fame. Cribb also
stood out as a champion. But Broughton, Slack, Belcher, and the
rest—their end was one common tragedy.

The latter days of the fighting men were often curious and unexpected,
though as a rule they were short-lived, for the alternation of the
excess of their normal existence and the asceticism of their training
undermined their constitution. Their popularity among both men and
women was their undoing, and the king of the ring went down at last
before that deadliest of light-weights, the microbe of tubercle, or
some equally fatal and perhaps less reputable bacillus. The crockiest
of spectators had a better chance of life than the magnificent young
athlete whom he had come to admire. Jem Belcher died at 30, Hooper at
31, Pearce, the Game Chicken, at 32, Turner at 35, Hudson at 38,
Randall, the Nonpareil, at 34. Occasionally, when they did reach mature
age, their lives took the strangest turns. Gully, as is well known,
became a wealthy man, and Member for Pontefract in the Reform
Parliament. Humphries developed into a successful coal merchant. Jack
Martin became a convinced teetotaller and vegetarian. Jem Ward, the
Black Diamond, developed considerable powers as an artist. Cribb,
Spring, Langan, and many others, were successful publicans. Strangest
of all, perhaps, was Broughton, who spent his old age haunting every
sale of old pictures and bric-a-brac. One who saw him has recorded his
impression of the silent old gentleman, clad in old-fashioned garb,
with his catalogue in his hand—Broughton, once the terror of England,
and now the harmless and gentle collector.

Many of them, as was but natural, died violent deaths, some by accident
and a few by their own hands. No man of the first class ever died in
the ring. The nearest approach to it was the singular and mournful fate
which befell Simon Byrne, the brave Irishman, who had the misfortune to
cause the death of his antagonist, Angus Mackay, and afterwards met his
own end at the hands of Deaf Burke. Neither Byrne nor Mackay could,
however, be said to be boxers of the very first rank. It certainly
would appear, if we may argue from the prize-ring, that the human
machine becomes more delicate and is more sensitive to jar or shock. In
the early days a fatal end to a fight was exceedingly rare. Gradually
such tragedies became rather more common, until now even with the
gloves they have shocked us by their frequency, and we feel that the
rude play of our forefathers is indeed too rough for a more highly
organized generation. Still, it may help us to clear our minds of cant
if we remember that within two or three years the hunting-field and the
steeple-chase claim more victims than the prize-ring has done in two
centuries.

Many of these men had served their country well with that strength and
courage which brought them fame. Cribb was, if I mistake not, in the
Royal Navy. So was the terrible dwarf Scroggins, all chest and
shoulders, whose springing hits for many a year carried all before them
until the canny Welshman, Ned Turner, stopped his career, only to be
stopped in turn by the brilliant Irishman, Jack Randall. Shaw, who
stood high among the heavy-weights, was cut to pieces by the French
Cuirassiers in the first charge at Waterloo. The brutal Berks died
greatly in the breach of Badajos. The lives of these men stood for
something, and that was just the one supreme thing which the times
called for—an unflinching endurance which could bear up against a world
in arms. Look at Jem Belcher—beautiful, heroic Jem, a manlier Byron—but
there, this is not an essay on the old prize-ring, and one man’s lore
is another man’s bore. Let us pass those three low-down, unjustifiable,
fascinating volumes, and on to nobler topics beyond!




VI.


Which are the great short stories of the English language? Not a bad
basis for a debate! This I am sure of: that there are far fewer
supremely good short stories than there are supremely good long books.
It takes more exquisite skill to carve the cameo than the statue. But
the strangest thing is that the two excellences seem to be separate and
even antagonistic. Skill in the one by no means ensures skill in the
other. The great masters of our literature, Fielding, Scott, Dickens,
Thackeray, Reade, have left no single short story of outstanding merit
behind them, with the possible exception of Wandering Willie’s Tale in
“Red Gauntlet.” On the other hand, men who have been very great in the
short story, Stevenson, Poe, and Bret Harte, have written no great
book. The champion sprinter is seldom a five-miler as well.

Well, now, if you had to choose your team whom would you put in? You
have not really a large choice. What are the points by which you judge
them? You want strength, novelty, compactness, intensity of interest, a
single vivid impression left upon the mind. Poe is the master of all. I
may remark by the way that it is the sight of his green cover, the next
in order upon my favourite shelf, which has started this train of
thought. Poe is, to my mind, the supreme original short story writer of
all time. His brain was like a seed-pod full of seeds which flew
carelessly around, and from which have sprung nearly all our modern
types of story. Just think of what he did in his offhand, prodigal
fashion, seldom troubling to repeat a success, but pushing on to some
new achievement. To him must be ascribed the monstrous progeny of
writers on the detection of crime—“_quorum pars parva fui!_” Each may
find some little development of his own, but his main art must trace
back to those admirable stories of Monsieur Dupin, so wonderful in
their masterful force, their reticence, their quick dramatic point.
After all, mental acuteness is the one quality which can be ascribed to
the ideal detective, and when that has once been admirably done,
succeeding writers must necessarily be content for all time to follow
in the same main track. But not only is Poe the originator of the
detective story; all treasure-hunting, cryptogram-solving yarns trace
back to his “Gold Bug,” just as all pseudo-scientific Verne-and-Wells
stories have their prototypes in the “Voyage to the Moon,” and the
“Case of Monsieur Valdemar.” If every man who receives a cheque for a
story which owes its springs to Poe were to pay tithe to a monument for
the master, he would have a pyramid as big as that of Cheops.

And yet I could only give him two places in my team. One would be for
the “Gold Bug,” the other for the “Murder in the Rue Morgue.” I do not
see how either of those could be bettered. But I would not admit
_perfect_ excellence to any other of his stories. These two have a
proportion and a perspective which are lacking in the others, the
horror or weirdness of the idea intensified by the coolness of the
narrator and of the principal actor, Dupin in the one case and Le Grand
in the other. The same may be said of Bret Harte, also one of those
great short story tellers who proved himself incapable of a longer
flight. He was always like one of his own gold-miners who struck a rich
pocket, but found no continuous reef. The pocket was, alas, a very
limited one, but the gold was of the best. “The Luck of Roaring Camp”
and “Tennessee’s Partner” are both, I think, worthy of a place among my
immortals. They are, it is true, so tinged with Dickens as to be almost
parodies of the master, but they have a symmetry and satisfying
completeness as short stories to which Dickens himself never attained.
The man who can read those two stories without a gulp in the throat is
not a man I envy.

And Stevenson? Surely he shall have two places also, for where is a
finer sense of what the short story can do? He wrote, in my judgment,
two masterpieces in his life, and each of them is essentially a short
story, though the one happened to be published as a volume. The one is
“Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde,” which, whether you take it as a vivid
narrative or as a wonderfully deep and true allegory, is a supremely
fine bit of work. The other story of my choice would be “The Pavilion
on the Links”—the very model of dramatic narrative. That story stamped
itself so clearly on my brain when I read it in _Cornhill_ that when I
came across it again many years afterwards in volume form, I was able
instantly to recognize two small modifications of the text—each very
much for the worse—from the original form. They were small things, but
they seemed somehow like a chip on a perfect statue. Surely it is only
a very fine work, of art which could leave so definite an impression as
that. Of course, there are a dozen other of his stories which would put
the average writer’s best work to shame, all with the strange Stevenson
glamour upon them, of which I may discourse later, but only to those
two would I be disposed to admit that complete excellence which would
pass them into such a team as this.

And who else? If it be not an impertinence to mention a contemporary, I
should certainly have a brace from Rudyard Kipling. His power, his
compression, his dramatic sense, his way of glowing suddenly into a
vivid flame, all mark him as a great master. But which are we to choose
from that long and varied collection, many of which have claims to the
highest? Speaking from memory, I should say that the stories of his
which have impressed me most are “The Drums of the Fore and Aft,” “The
Man who Would be King,” “The Man who Was,” and “The Brushwood Boy.”
Perhaps, on the whole, it is the first two which I should choose to add
to my list of masterpieces.

They are stories which invite criticism and yet defy it. The great
batsman at cricket is the man who can play an unorthodox game, take
every liberty which is denied to inferior players, and yet succeed
brilliantly in the face of his disregard of law. So it is here. I
should think the model of these stories is the most dangerous that any
young writer could follow. There is digression, that most deadly fault
in the short narrative; there is incoherence, there is want of
proportion which makes the story stand still for pages and bound
forward in a few sentences. But genius overrides all that, just as the
great cricketer hooks the off ball and glides the straight one to leg.
There is a dash, an exuberance, a full-blooded, confident mastery which
carries everything before it. Yes, no team of immortals would be
complete which did not contain at least two representatives of Kipling.

And now whom? Nathaniel Hawthorne never appealed in the highest degree
to me. The fault, I am sure, is my own, but I always seemed to crave
stronger fare than he gave me. It was too subtle, too elusive, for
effect. Indeed, I have been more affected by some of the short work of
his son Julian, though I can quite understand the high artistic claims
which the senior writer has, and the delicate charm of his style. There
is Bulwer Lytton as a claimant. His “Haunted and the Haunters” is the
very best ghost story that I know. As such I should include it in my
list. There was a story, too, in one of the old
Blackwoods—“Metempsychosis” it was called, which left so deep an
impression upon my mind that I should be inclined, though it is many
years since I read it, to number it with the best. Another story which
has the characteristics of great work is Grant Allen’s “John Creedy.”
So good a story upon so philosophic a basis deserves a place among the
best. There is some first-class work to be picked also from the
contemporary work of Wells and of Quiller-Couch which reaches a high
standard. One little sketch—“Old Œson” in “Noughts and Crosses”—is, in
my opinion, as good as anything of the kind which I have ever read.

And all this didactic talk comes from looking at that old green cover
of Poe. I am sure that if I had to name the few books which have really
influenced my own life I should have to put this one second only to
Macaulay’s Essays. I read it young when my mind was plastic. It
stimulated my imagination and set before me a supreme example of
dignity and force in the methods of telling a story. It is not
altogether a healthy influence, perhaps. It turns the thoughts too
forcibly to the morbid and the strange.

He was a saturnine creature, devoid of humour and geniality, with a
love for the grotesque and the terrible. The reader must himself
furnish the counteracting qualities or Poe may become a dangerous
comrade. We know along what perilous tracks and into what deadly
quagmires his strange mind led him, down to that grey October Sunday
morning when he was picked up, a dying man, on the side-walk at
Baltimore, at an age which should have seen him at the very prime of
his strength and his manhood.

I have said that I look upon Poe as the world’s supreme short story
writer. His nearest rival, I should say, was Maupassant. The great
Norman never rose to the extreme force and originality of the American,
but he had a natural inherited power, an inborn instinct towards the
right way of making his effects, which mark him as a great master. He
produced stories because it was in him to do so, as naturally and as
perfectly as an apple tree produces apples. What a fine, sensitive,
artistic touch it is! How easily and delicately the points are made!
How clear and nervous is his style, and how free from that redundancy
which disfigures so much of our English work! He pares it down to the
quick all the time.

I cannot write the name of Maupassant without recalling what was either
a spiritual interposition or an extraordinary coincidence in my own
life. I had been travelling in Switzerland and had visited, among other
places, that Gemmi Pass, where a huge cliff separates a French from a
German canton. On the summit of this cliff was a small inn, where we
broke our journey. It was explained to us that, although the inn was
inhabited all the year round, still for about three months in winter it
was utterly isolated, because it could at any time only be approached
by winding paths on the mountain side, and when these became
obliterated by snow it was impossible either to come up or to descend.
They could see the lights in the valley beneath them, but were as
lonely as if they lived in the moon. So curious a situation naturally
appealed to one’s imagination, and I speedily began to build up a short
story in my own mind, depending upon a group of strong antagonistic
characters being penned up in this inn, loathing each other and yet
utterly unable to get away from each other’s society, every day
bringing them nearer to tragedy. For a week or so, as I travelled, I
was turning over the idea.

At the end of that time I returned through France. Having nothing to
read I happened to buy a volume of Maupassant’s Tales which I had never
seen before. The first story was called “L’Auberge” (The Inn)—and as I
ran my eye down the printed page I was amazed to see the two words,
“Kandersteg” and “Gemmi Pass.” I settled down and read it with
ever-growing amazement. The scene was laid in the inn I had visited.
The plot depended on the isolation of a group of people through the
snowfall. Everything that I imagined was there, save that Maupassant
had brought in a savage hound.

Of course, the genesis of the thing is clear enough. He had chanced to
visit the inn, and had been impressed as I had been by the same train
of thought. All that is quite intelligible. But what is perfectly
marvellous is that in that short journey I should have chanced to buy
the one book in all the world which would prevent me from making a
public fool of myself, for who would ever have believed that my work
was not an imitation? I do not think that the hypothesis of coincidence
can cover the facts. It is one of several incidents in my life which
have convinced me of spiritual interposition—of the promptings of some
beneficent force outside ourselves, which tries to help us where it
can. The old Catholic doctrine of the Guardian Angel is not only a
beautiful one, but has in it, I believe, a real basis of truth.

Or is it that our subliminal ego, to use the jargon of the new
psychology, or our astral, in the terms of the new theology, can learn
and convey to the mind that which our own known senses are unable to
apprehend? But that is too long a side track for us to turn down it.

When Maupassant chose he could run Poe close in that domain of the
strange and weird which the American had made so entirely his own. Have
you read Maupassant’s story called “Le Horla”? That is as good a bit of
_diablerie_ as you could wish for. And the Frenchman has, of course,
far the broader range. He has a keen sense of humour, breaking out
beyond all decorum in some of his stories, but giving a pleasant
sub-flavour to all of them. And yet, when all is said, who can doubt
that the austere and dreadful American is far the greater and more
original mind of the two?

Talking of weird American stories, have you ever read any of the works
of Ambrose Bierce? I have one of his works there, “In the Midst of
Life.” This man had a flavour quite his own, and was a great artist in
his way. It is not cheering reading, but it leaves its mark upon you,
and that is the proof of good work.

I have often wondered where Poe got his style. There is a sombre
majesty about his best work, as if it were carved from polished jet,
which is peculiarly his own. I dare say if I took down that volume I
could light anywhere upon a paragraph which would show you what I mean.
This is the kind of thing—

“Now there are fine tales in the volumes of the Magi—in the iron-bound
melancholy volumes of the Magi. Therein, I say, are glorious histories
of the heaven and of the earth, and of the mighty sea—and of the genius
that overruled the sea, and the earth, and the lofty heaven. There were
much lore, too, in the sayings which were said by the Sybils, and holy,
holy things were heard of old by the dim leaves which trembled round
Dodona, but as Allah liveth, that fable which the Demon told me as he
sat by my side in the shadow of the tomb, I hold to be the most
wonderful of all.” Or this sentence: “And then did we, the seven, start
from our seats in horror, and stand trembling and aghast, for the tones
in the voice of the shadow were not the tones of any one being, but of
a multitude of beings, and, varying in their cadences from syllable to
syllable, fell duskily upon our ears in the well-remembered and
familiar accents of many thousand departed friends.”

Is there not a sense of austere dignity? No man invents a style. It
always derives back from some influence, or, as is more usual, it is a
compromise between several influences. I cannot trace Poe’s. And yet if
Hazlitt and De Quincey had set forth to tell weird stories they might
have developed something of the kind.

Now, by your leave, we will pass on to my noble edition of “The
Cloister and the Hearth,” the next volume on the left.

I notice, in glancing over my rambling remarks, that I classed
“Ivanhoe” as the second historical novel of the century. I dare say
there are many who would give “Esmond” the first place, and I can quite
understand their position, although it is not my own. I recognize the
beauty of the style, the consistency of the character-drawing, the
absolutely perfect Queen Anne atmosphere. There was never an historical
novel written by a man who knew his period so thoroughly. But, great as
these virtues are, they are not the essential in a novel. The essential
in a novel is interest, though Addison unkindly remarked that the real
essential was that the pastrycooks should never run short of paper. Now
“Esmond” is, in my opinion, exceedingly interesting during the
campaigns in the Lowlands, and when our Machiavelian hero, the Duke,
comes in, and also whenever Lord Mohun shows his ill-omened face; but
there are long stretches of the story which are heavy reading. A
pre-eminently good novel must always advance and never mark time.
“Ivanhoe” never halts for an instant, and that just makes its
superiority as a novel over “Esmond,” though as a piece of literature I
think the latter is the more perfect.

No, if I had three votes, I should plump them all for “The Cloister and
the Hearth,” as being our greatest historical novel, and, indeed, as
being our greatest novel of any sort. I think I may claim to have read
most of the more famous foreign novels of last century, and (speaking
only for myself and within the limits of my reading) I have been more
impressed by that book of Reade’s and by Tolstoi’s “Peace and War” than
by any others. They seem to me to stand at the very top of the
century’s fiction. There is a certain resemblance in the two—the sense
of space, the number of figures, the way in which characters drop in
and drop out. The Englishman is the more romantic. The Russian is the
more real and earnest. But they are both great.

Think of what Reade does in that one book. He takes the reader by the
hand, and he leads him away into the Middle Ages, and not a
conventional study-built Middle Age, but a period quivering with life,
full of folk who are as human and real as a ’bus-load in Oxford Street.
He takes him through Holland, he shows him the painters, the dykes, the
life. He leads him down the long line of the Rhine, the spinal marrow
of Mediaeval Europe. He shows him the dawn of printing, the beginnings
of freedom, the life of the great mercantile cities of South Germany,
the state of Italy, the artist-life of Rome, the monastic institutions
on the eve of the Reformation. And all this between the covers of one
book, so naturally introduced, too, and told with such vividness and
spirit. Apart from the huge scope of it, the mere study of Gerard’s own
nature, his rise, his fall, his regeneration, the whole pitiable
tragedy at the end, make the book a great one. It contains, I think, a
blending of knowledge with imagination, which makes it stand alone in
our literature. Let any one read the “Autobiography of Benvenuto
Cellini,” and then Charles Reade’s picture of Mediaeval Roman life, if
he wishes to appreciate the way in which Reade has collected his rough
ore and has then smelted it all down in his fiery imagination. It is a
good thing to have the industry to collect facts. It is a greater and a
rarer one to have the tact to know how to use them when you have got
them. To be exact without pedantry, and thorough without being dull,
that should be the ideal of the writer of historical romance.

Reade is one of the most perplexing figures in our literature. Never
was there a man so hard to place. At his best he is the best we have.
At his worst he is below the level of Surreyside melodrama. But his
best have weak pieces, and his worst have good. There is always silk
among his cotton, and cotton among his silk. But, for all his flaws,
the man who, in addition to the great book, of which I have already
spoken, wrote “It is Never Too Late to Mend,” “Hard Cash,” “Foul Play,”
and “Griffith Gaunt,” must always stand in the very first rank of our
novelists.

There is a quality of heart about his work which I recognize nowhere
else. He so absolutely loves his own heroes and heroines, while he so
cordially detests his own villains, that he sweeps your emotions along
with his own. No one has ever spoken warmly enough of the humanity and
the lovability of his women. It is a rare gift—very rare for a man—this
power of drawing a human and delightful girl. If there is a better one
in nineteenth-century fiction than Julia Dodd I have never had the
pleasure of meeting her. A man who could draw a character so delicate
and so delightful, and yet could write such an episode as that of the
Robber Inn in “The Cloister and the Hearth,” adventurous romance in its
highest form, has such a range of power as is granted to few men. My
hat is always ready to come off to Charles Reade.




VII.


It is good to have the magic door shut behind us. On the other side of
that door are the world and its troubles, hopes and fears, headaches
and heartaches, ambitions and disappointments; but within, as you lie
back on the green settee, and face the long lines of your silent
soothing comrades, there is only peace of spirit and rest of mind in
the company of the great dead. Learn to love, learn to admire them;
learn to know what their comradeship means; for until you have done so
the greatest solace and anodyne God has given to man have not yet shed
their blessing upon you. Here behind this magic door is the rest house,
where you may forget the past, enjoy the present, and prepare for the
future.

You who have sat with me before upon the green settee are familiar with
the upper shelf, with the tattered Macaulay, the dapper Gibbon, the
drab Boswell, the olive-green Scott, the pied Borrow, and all the
goodly company who rub shoulders yonder. By the way, how one wishes
that one’s dear friends would only be friends also with each other. Why
should Borrow snarl so churlishly at Scott? One would have thought that
noble spirit and romantic fancy would have charmed the huge vagrant,
and yet there is no word too bitter for the younger man to use towards
the elder. The fact is that Borrow had one dangerous virus in him—a
poison which distorts the whole vision—for he was a bigoted sectarian
in religion, seeing no virtue outside his own interpretation of the
great riddle. Downright heathendom, the blood-stained Berserk or the
chaunting Druid, appealed to his mind through his imagination, but the
man of his own creed and time who differed from him in minutiae of
ritual, or in the interpretation of mystic passages, was at once evil
to the bone, and he had no charity of any sort for such a person. Scott
therefore, with his reverent regard for old usages, became at once
hateful in his eyes. In any case he was a disappointed man, the big
Borrow, and I cannot remember that he ever had much to say that was
good of any brother author. Only in the bards of Wales and in the
Scalds of the Sagas did he seem to find his kindred spirits, though it
has been suggested that his complex nature took this means of informing
the world that he could read both Cymric and Norse. But we must not be
unkind behind the magic door—and yet to be charitable to the
uncharitable is surely the crown of virtue.

So much for the top line, concerning which I have already gossipped for
six sittings, but there is no surcease for you, reader, for as you see
there is a second line, and yet a third, all equally dear to my heart,
and all appealing in the same degree to my emotions and to my memory.
Be as patient as you may, while I talk of these old friends, and tell
you why I love them, and all that they have meant to me in the past. If
you picked any book from that line you would be picking a little fibre
also from my mind, very small, no doubt, and yet an intimate and
essential part of what is now myself. Hereditary impulses, personal
experiences, books—those are the three forces which go to the making of
man. These are the books.

This second line consists, as you see, of novelists of the eighteenth
century, or those of them whom I regard as essential. After all,
putting aside single books, such as Sterne’s “Tristram Shandy,”
Goldsmith’s “Vicar of Wakefield,” and Miss Burney’s “Evelina,” there
are only three authors who count, and they in turn wrote only three
books each, of first-rate importance, so that by the mastery of nine
books one might claim to have a fairly broad view of this most
important and distinctive branch of English literature. The three men
are, of course, Fielding, Richardson, and Smollett. The books are:
Richardson’s “Clarissa Harlowe,” “Pamela,” and “Sir Charles Grandison”;
Fielding’s “Tom Jones”, “Joseph Andrews,” and “Amelia”; Smollett’s
“Peregrine Pickle,” “Humphrey Clinker,” and “Roderick Random.” There we
have the real work of the three great contemporaries who illuminated
the middle of the eighteenth century—only nine volumes in all. Let us
walk round these nine volumes, therefore, and see whether we cannot
discriminate and throw a little light, after this interval of a hundred
and fifty years, upon their comparative aims, and how far they have
justified them by the permanent value of their work. A fat little
bookseller in the City, a rakehell wit of noble blood, and a rugged
Scotch surgeon from the navy—those are the three strange immortals who
now challenge a comparison—the three men who dominate the fiction of
their century, and to whom we owe it that the life and the types of
that century are familiar to us, their fifth generation.

It is not a subject to be dogmatic upon, for I can imagine that these
three writers would appeal quite differently to every temperament, and
that whichever one might desire to champion one could find arguments to
sustain one’s choice. Yet I cannot think that any large section of the
critical public could maintain that Smollett was on the same level as
the other two. Ethically he is gross, though his grossness is
accompanied by a full-blooded humour which is more mirth-compelling
than the more polished wit of his rivals. I can remember in callow
boyhood—_puris omnia pura_—reading “Peregrine Pickle,” and laughing
until I cried over the Banquet in the Fashion of the Ancients. I read
it again in my manhood with the same effect, though with a greater
appreciation of its inherent bestiality. That merit, a gross primitive
merit, he has in a high degree, but in no other respect can he
challenge comparison with either Fielding or Richardson. His view of
life is far more limited, his characters less varied, his incidents
less distinctive, and his thoughts less deep. Assuredly I, for one,
should award him the third place in the trio.

But how about Richardson and Fielding? There is indeed a competition of
giants. Let us take the points of each in turn, and then compare them
with each other.

There is one characteristic, the rarest and subtlest of all, which each
of them had in a supreme degree. Each could draw the most delightful
women—the most perfect women, I think, in the whole range of our
literature. If the eighteenth-century women were like that, then the
eighteenth-century men got a great deal more than they ever deserved.
They had such a charming little dignity of their own, such good sense,
and yet such dear, pretty, dainty ways, so human and so charming, that
even now they become our ideals. One cannot come to know them without a
double emotion, one of respectful devotion towards themselves, and the
other of abhorrence for the herd of swine who surrounded them. Pamela,
Harriet Byron, Clarissa, Amelia, and Sophia Western were all equally
delightful, and it was not the negative charm of the innocent and
colourless woman, the amiable doll of the nineteenth century, but it
was a beauty of nature depending upon an alert mind, clear and strong
principles, true womanly feelings, and complete feminine charm. In this
respect our rival authors may claim a tie, for I could not give a
preference to one set of these perfect creatures over another. The
plump little printer and the worn-out man-about-town had each a supreme
woman in his mind.

But their men! Alas, what a drop is there! To say that we are all
capable of doing what Tom Jones did—as I have seen stated—is the worst
form of inverted cant, the cant which makes us out worse than we are.
It is a libel on mankind to say that a man who truly loves a woman is
usually false to her, and, above all, a libel that he should be false
in the vile fashion which aroused good Tom Newcome’s indignation. Tom
Jones was no more fit to touch the hem of Sophia’s dress than Captain
Booth was to be the mate of Amelia. Never once has Fielding drawn a
gentleman, save perhaps Squire Alworthy. A lusty, brawling,
good-hearted, material creature was the best that he could fashion.
Where, in his heroes, is there one touch of distinction, of
spirituality, of nobility? Here I think that the plebeian printer has
done very much better than the aristocrat. Sir Charles Grandison is a
very noble type—spoiled a little by over-coddling on the part of his
creator, perhaps, but a very high-souled and exquisite gentleman all
the same. Had _he_ married Sophia or Amelia I should not have forbidden
the banns. Even the persevering Mr. B—— and the too amorous Lovelace
were, in spite of their aberrations, men of gentle nature, and had
possibilities of greatness and tenderness within them. Yes, I cannot
doubt that Richardson drew the higher type of man—and that in Grandison
he has done what has seldom or never been bettered.

Richardson was also the subtler and deeper writer, in my opinion. He
concerns himself with fine consistent character-drawing, and with a
very searching analysis of the human heart, which is done so easily,
and in such simple English, that the depth and truth of it only come
upon reflection. He condescends to none of those scuffles and
buffetings and pantomime rallies which enliven, but cheapen, many of
Fielding’s pages. The latter has, it may be granted, a broader view of
life. He had personal acquaintance of circles far above, and also far
below, any which the douce citizen, who was his rival, had ever been
able or willing to explore. His pictures of low London life, the prison
scenes in “Amelia,” the thieves’ kitchens in “Jonathan Wild,” the
sponging houses and the slums, are as vivid and as complete as those of
his friend Hogarth—the most British of artists, even as Fielding was
the most British of writers. But the greatest and most permanent facts
of life are to be found in the smallest circles. Two men and a woman
may furnish either the tragedian or the comedian with the most
satisfying theme. And so, although his range was limited, Richardson
knew very clearly and very thoroughly just that knowledge which was
essential for his purpose. Pamela, the perfect woman of humble life,
Clarissa, the perfect lady, Grandison the ideal gentleman—these were
the three figures on which he lavished his most loving art. And now,
after one hundred and fifty years, I do not know where we may find more
satisfying types.

He was prolix, it may be admitted, but who could bear to have him cut?
He loved to sit down and tell you just all about it. His use of letters
for his narratives made this gossipy style more easy. First _he_ writes
and he tells all that passed. You have his letter. _She_ at the same
time writes to her friend, and also states her views. This also you
see. The friends in each case reply, and you have the advantage of
their comments and advice. You really do know all about it before you
finish. It may be a little wearisome at first, if you have been
accustomed to a more hustling style with fireworks in every chapter.
But gradually it creates an atmosphere in which you live, and you come
to know these people, with their characters and their troubles, as you
know no others of the dream-folk of fiction. Three times as long as an
ordinary book, no doubt, but why grudge the time? What is the hurry?
Surely it is better to read one masterpiece than three books which will
leave no permanent impression on the mind.

It was all attuned to the sedate life of that, the last of the quiet
centuries. In the lonely country-house, with few letters and fewer
papers, do you suppose that the readers ever complained of the length
of a book, or could have too much of the happy Pamela or of the unhappy
Clarissa? It is only under extraordinary circumstances that one can now
get into that receptive frame of mind which was normal then. Such an
occasion is recorded by Macaulay, when he tells how in some Indian hill
station, where books were rare, he let loose a copy of “Clarissa.” The
effect was what might have been expected. Richardson in a suitable
environment went through the community like a mild fever. They lived
him, and dreamed him, until the whole episode passed into literary
history, never to be forgotten by those who experienced it. It is
tuned, for every ear. That beautiful style is so correct and yet so
simple that there is no page which a scholar may not applaud nor a
servant-maid understand.

Of course, there are obvious disadvantages to the tale which is told in
letters. Scott reverted to it in “Guy Mannering,” and there are other
conspicuous successes, but vividness is always gained at the expense of
a strain upon the reader’s good-nature and credulity. One feels that
these constant details, these long conversations, could not possibly
have been recorded in such a fashion. The indignant and dishevelled
heroine could not sit down and record her escape with such cool
minuteness of description. Richardson does it as well as it could be
done, but it remains intrinsically faulty. Fielding, using the third
person, broke all the fetters which bound his rival, and gave a freedom
and personal authority to the novel which it had never before enjoyed.
There at least he is the master.

And yet, on the whole, my balance inclines towards Richardson, though I
dare say I am one in a hundred in thinking so. First of all, beyond
anything I may have already urged, he had the supreme credit of having
been the first. Surely the originator should have a higher place than
the imitator, even if in imitating he should also improve and amplify.
It is Richardson and not Fielding who is the father of the English
novel, the man who first saw that without romantic gallantry, and
without bizarre imaginings, enthralling stories may be made from
everyday life, told in everyday language. This was his great new
departure. So entirely was Fielding his imitator, or rather perhaps his
parodist, that with supreme audacity (some would say brazen impudence)
he used poor Richardson’s own characters, taken from “Pamela,” in his
own first novel, “Joseph Andrews,” and used them too for the unkind
purpose of ridiculing them. As a matter of literary ethics, it is as if
Thackeray wrote a novel bringing in Pickwick and Sam Weller in order to
show what faulty characters these were. It is no wonder that even the
gentle little printer grew wroth, and alluded to his rival as a
somewhat unscrupulous man.

And then there is the vexed question of morals. Surely in talking of
this also there is a good deal of inverted cant among a certain class
of critics. The inference appears to be that there is some subtle
connection between immorality and art, as if the handling of the lewd,
or the depicting of it, were in some sort the hallmark of the true
artist. It is not difficult to handle or depict. On the contrary, it is
so easy, and so essentially dramatic in many of its forms, that the
temptation to employ it is ever present. It is the easiest and cheapest
of all methods of creating a spurious effect. The difficulty does not
lie in doing it. The difficulty lies in avoiding it. But one tries to
avoid it because on the face of it there is no reason why a writer
should cease to be a gentleman, or that he should write for a woman’s
eyes that which he would be justly knocked down for having said in a
woman’s ears. But “you must draw the world as it is.” Why must you?
Surely it is just in selection and restraint that the artist is shown.
It is true that in a coarser age great writers heeded no restrictions,
but life itself had fewer restrictions then. We are of our own age, and
must live up to it.

But must these sides of life be absolutely excluded? By no means. Our
decency need not weaken into prudery. It all lies in the spirit in
which it is done. No one who wished to lecture on these various spirits
could preach on a better text than these three great rivals,
Richardson, Fielding, and Smollett. It is possible to draw vice with
some freedom for the purpose of condemning it. Such a writer is a
moralist, and there is no better example than Richardson. Again, it is
possible to draw vice with neither sympathy nor disapprobation, but
simply as a fact which is there. Such a writer is a realist, and such
was Fielding. Once more, it is possible to draw vice in order to
extract amusement from it. Such a man is a coarse humorist, and such
was Smollett. Lastly, it is possible to draw vice in order to show
sympathy with it. Such a man is a wicked man, and there were many among
the writers of the Restoration. But of all reasons that exist for
treating this side of life, Richardson’s were the best, and nowhere do
we find it more deftly done.

Apart from his writings, there must have been something very noble
about Fielding as a man. He was a better hero than any that he drew.
Alone he accepted the task of cleansing London, at that time the most
dangerous and lawless of European capitals. Hogarth’s pictures give
some notion of it in the pre-Fielding days, the low roughs, the
high-born bullies, the drunkenness, the villainies, the thieves’
kitchens with their riverside trapdoors, down which the body is thrust.
This was the Augean stable which had to be cleaned, and poor Hercules
was weak and frail and physically more fitted for a sick-room than for
such a task. It cost him his life, for he died at 47, worn out with his
own exertions. It might well have cost him his life in more dramatic
fashion, for he had become a marked man to the criminal classes, and he
headed his own search-parties when, on the information of some bribed
rascal, a new den of villainy was exposed. But he carried his point. In
little more than a year the thing was done, and London turned from the
most rowdy to what it has ever since remained, the most law-abiding of
European capitals. Has any man ever left a finer monument behind him?

If you want the real human Fielding you will find him not in the
novels, where his real kindliness is too often veiled by a mock
cynicism, but in his “Diary of his Voyage to Lisbon.” He knew that his
health was irretrievably ruined and that his years were numbered. Those
are the days when one sees a man as he is, when he has no longer a
motive for affectation or pretence in the immediate presence of the
most tremendous of all realities. Yet, sitting in the shadow of death,
Fielding displayed a quiet, gentle courage and constancy of mind, which
show how splendid a nature had been shrouded by his earlier frailties.

Just one word upon another eighteenth-century novel before I finish
this somewhat didactic chat. You will admit that I have never prosed so
much before, but the period and the subject seem to encourage it. I
skip Sterne, for I have no great sympathy with his finicky methods. And
I skip Miss Burney’s novels, as being feminine reflections of the great
masters who had just preceded her. But Goldsmith’s “Vicar of Wakefield”
surely deserves one paragraph to itself. There is a book which is
tinged throughout, as was all Goldsmith’s work, with a beautiful
nature. No one who had not a fine heart could have written it, just as
no one without a fine heart could have written “The Deserted Village.”
How strange it is to think of old Johnson patronizing or snubbing the
shrinking Irishman, when both in poetry, in fiction, and in the drama
the latter has proved himself far the greater man. But here is an
object-lesson of how the facts of life may be treated without offence.
Nothing is shirked. It is all faced and duly recorded. Yet if I wished
to set before the sensitive mind of a young girl a book which would
prepare her for life without in any way contaminating her delicacy of
feeling, there is no book which I should choose so readily as “The
Vicar of Wakefield.”

So much for the eighteenth-century novelists. They have a shelf of
their own in the case, and a corner of their own in my brain. For years
you may never think of them, and then suddenly some stray word or train
of thought leads straight to them, and you look at them and love them,
and rejoice that you know them. But let us pass to something which may
interest you more.

If statistics could be taken in the various free libraries of the
kingdom to prove the comparative popularity of different novelists with
the public, I think that it is quite certain that Mr. George Meredith
would come out very low indeed. If, on the other hand, a number of
authors were convened to determine which of their fellow-craftsmen they
considered the greatest and the most stimulating to their own minds, I
am equally confident that Mr. Meredith would have a vast preponderance
of votes. Indeed, his only conceivable rival would be Mr. Hardy. It
becomes an interesting study, therefore, why there should be such a
divergence of opinion as to his merits, and what the qualities are
which have repelled so many readers, and yet have attracted those whose
opinion must be allowed to have a special weight.

The most obvious reason is his complete unconventionality. The public
read to be amused. The novelist reads to have new light thrown upon his
art. To read Meredith is _not_ a mere amusement; it is an intellectual
exercise, a kind of mental dumb-bell with which you develop your
thinking powers. Your mind is in a state of tension the whole time that
you are reading him.

If you will follow my nose as the sportsman follows that of his
pointer, you will observe that these remarks are excited by the
presence of my beloved “Richard Feverel,” which lurks in yonder corner.
What a great book it is, how wise and how witty! Others of the master’s
novels may be more characteristic or more profound, but for my own part
it is the one which I would always present to the new-comer who had not
yet come under the influence. I think that I should put it third after
“Vanity Fair” and “The Cloister and the Hearth” if I had to name the
three novels which I admire most in the Victorian era. The book was
published, I believe, in 1859, and it is almost incredible, and says
little for the discrimination of critics or public, that it was nearly
twenty years before a second edition was needed.

But there are never effects without causes, however inadequate the
cause may be. What was it that stood in the way of the book’s success?
Undoubtedly it was the style. And yet it is subdued and tempered here
with little of the luxuriance and exuberance which it attained in the
later works. But it was an innovation, and it stalled off both the
public and the critics. They regarded it, no doubt, as an affectation,
as Carlyle’s had been considered twenty years before, forgetting that
in the case of an original genius style is an organic thing, part of
the man as much as the colour of his eyes. It is not, to quote Carlyle,
a shirt to be taken on and off at pleasure, but a skin, eternally
fixed. And this strange, powerful style, how is it to be described?
Best, perhaps, in his own strong words, when he spoke of Carlyle with
perhaps the _arrière pensée_ that the words would apply as strongly to
himself.

“His favourite author,” says he, “was one writing on heroes in a style
resembling either early architecture or utter dilapidation, so loose
and rough it seemed. A wind-in-the-orchard style that tumbled down here
and there an appreciable fruit with uncouth bluster, sentences without
commencements running to abrupt endings and smoke, like waves against a
sea-wall, learned dictionary words giving a hand to street slang, and
accents falling on them haphazard, like slant rays from driving clouds;
all the pages in a breeze, the whole book producing a kind of
electrical agitation in the mind and joints.”

What a wonderful description and example of style! And how vivid is the
impression left by such expressions as “all the pages in a breeze.” As
a comment on Carlyle, and as a sample of Meredith, the passage is
equally perfect.

Well, “Richard Feverel” has come into its own at last. I confess to
having a strong belief in the critical discernment of the public. I do
not think good work is often overlooked. Literature, like water, finds
its true level. Opinion is slow to form, but it sets true at last. I am
sure that if the critics were to unite to praise a bad book or to damn
a good one they could (and continually do) have a five-year influence,
but it would in no wise affect the final result. Sheridan said that if
all the fleas in his bed had been unanimous, they could have pushed him
out of it. I do not think that any unanimity of critics has ever pushed
a good book out of literature.

Among the minor excellences of “Richard Feverel”—excuse the prolixity
of an enthusiast—are the scattered aphorisms which are worthy of a
place among our British proverbs. What could be more exquisite than
this, “Who rises from prayer a better man his prayer is answered”; or
this, “Expediency is man’s wisdom. Doing right is God’s”; or, “All
great thoughts come from the heart”? Good are the words “The coward
amongst us is he who sneers at the failings of humanity,” and a healthy
optimism rings in the phrase “There is for the mind but one grasp of
happiness; from that uppermost pinnacle of wisdom whence we see that
this world is well designed.” In more playful mood is “Woman is the
last thing which will be civilized by man.” Let us hurry away abruptly,
for he who starts quotation from “Richard Feverel” is lost.

He has, as you see, a goodly line of his brothers beside him. There are
the Italian ones, “Sandra Belloni,” and “Vittoria”; there is “Rhoda
Fleming,” which carried Stevenson off his critical feet; “Beauchamp’s
Career,” too, dealing with obsolete politics. No great writer should
spend himself upon a temporary theme. It is like the beauty who is
painted in some passing fashion of gown. She tends to become obsolete
along with her frame. Here also is the dainty “Diana,” the egoist with
immortal Willoughby Pattern, eternal type of masculine selfishness, and
“Harry Richmond,” the first chapters of which are, in my opinion, among
the finest pieces of narrative prose in the language. That great mind
would have worked in any form which his age had favoured. He is a
novelist by accident. As an Elizabethan he would have been a great
dramatist; under Queen Anne a great essayist. But whatever medium he
worked in, he must equally have thrown the image of a great brain and a
great soul.




VIII.


We have left our eighteenth-century novelists—Fielding, Richardson, and
Smollett—safely behind us, with all their solidity and their audacity,
their sincerity, and their coarseness of fibre. They have brought us,
as you perceive, to the end of the shelf. What, not wearied? Ready for
yet another? Let us run down this next row, then, and I will tell you a
few things which may be of interest, though they will be dull enough if
you have not been born with that love of books in your heart which is
among the choicest gifts of the gods. If that is wanting, then one
might as well play music to the deaf, or walk round the Academy with
the colour-blind, as appeal to the book-sense of an unfortunate who has
it not.

There is this old brown volume in the corner. How it got there I cannot
imagine, for it is one of those which I bought for threepence out of
the remnant box in Edinburgh, and its weather-beaten comrades are up
yonder in the back gallery, while this one has elbowed its way among
the quality in the stalls. But it is worth a word or two. Take it out
and handle it! See how swarthy it is, how squat, with how bullet-proof
a cover of scaling leather. Now open the fly-leaf “_Ex libris_
Guilielmi Whyte. 1672” in faded yellow ink. I wonder who William Whyte
may have been, and what he did upon earth in the reign of the merry
monarch. A pragmatical seventeenth-century lawyer, I should judge, by
that hard, angular writing. The date of issue is 1642, so it was
printed just about the time when the Pilgrim Fathers were settling down
into their new American home, and the first Charles’s head was still
firm upon his shoulders, though a little puzzled, no doubt, at what was
going on around it. The book is in Latin—though Cicero might not have
admitted it—and it treats of the laws of warfare.

I picture some pedantic Dugald Dalgetty bearing it about under his buff
coat, or down in his holster, and turning up the reference for every
fresh emergency which occurred. “Hullo! here’s a well!” says he. “I
wonder if I may poison it?” Out comes the book, and he runs a dirty
forefinger down the index. “_Ob fas est aquam hostis venere_,” etc.
“Tut, tut, it’s not allowed. But here are some of the enemy in a barn?
What about that?” “_Ob fas est hostem incendio_,” etc. “Yes; he says we
may. Quick, Ambrose, up with the straw and the tinder box.” Warfare was
no child’s play about the time when Tilly sacked Magdeburg, and
Cromwell turned his hand from the mash tub to the sword. It might not
be much better now in a long campaign, when men were hardened and
embittered. Many of these laws are unrepealed, and it is less than a
century since highly disciplined British troops claimed their dreadful
rights at Badajos and Rodrigo. Recent European wars have been so short
that discipline and humanity have not had time to go to pieces, but a
long war would show that man is ever the same, and that civilization is
the thinnest of veneers.

Now you see that whole row of books which takes you at one sweep nearly
across the shelf? I am rather proud of those, for they are my
collection of Napoleonic military memoirs. There is a story told of an
illiterate millionaire who gave a wholesale dealer an order for a copy
of all books in any language treating of any aspect of Napoleon’s
career. He thought it would fill a case in his library. He was somewhat
taken aback, however, when in a few weeks he received a message from
the dealer that he had got 40,000 volumes, and awaited instructions as
to whether he should send them on as an instalment, or wait for a
complete set. The figures may not be exact, but at least they bring
home the impossibility of exhausting the subject, and the danger of
losing one’s self for years in a huge labyrinth of reading, which may
end by leaving no very definite impression upon your mind. But one
might, perhaps, take a corner of it, as I have done here in the
military memoirs, and there one might hope to get some finality.

Here is Marbot at this end—the first of all soldier books in the world.
This is the complete three-volume French edition, with red and gold
cover, smart and _débonnaire_ like its author. Here he is in one
frontispiece with his pleasant, round, boyish face, as a Captain of his
beloved Chasseurs. And here in the other is the grizzled old bull-dog
as a full general, looking as full of fight as ever. It was a real blow
to me when some one began to throw doubts upon the authenticity of
Marbot’s memoirs. Homer may be dissolved into a crowd of skin-clad
bards. Even Shakespeare may be jostled in his throne of honour by
plausible Baconians; but the human, the gallant, the inimitable Marbot!
His book is that which gives us the best picture by far of the
Napoleonic soldiers, and to me they are even more interesting than
their great leader, though his must ever be the most singular figure in
history. But those soldiers, with their huge shakoes, their hairy
knapsacks, and their hearts of steel—what men they were! And what a
latent power there must be in this French nation which could go on
pouring out the blood of its sons for twenty-three years with hardly a
pause!

It took all that time to work off the hot ferment which the Revolution
had left in men’s veins. And they were not exhausted, for the very last
fight which the French fought was the finest of all. Proud as we are of
our infantry at Waterloo, it was really with the French cavalry that
the greenest laurels of that great epic rested. They got the better of
our own cavalry, they took our guns again and again, they swept a large
portion of our allies from the field, and finally they rode off
unbroken, and as full of fight as ever. Read Gronow’s “Memoirs,” that
chatty little yellow volume yonder which brings all that age back to us
more vividly than any more pretentious work, and you will find the
chivalrous admiration which our officers expressed at the fine
performance of the French horsemen.

It must be admitted that, looking back upon history, we have not always
been good allies, nor yet generous co-partners in the battlefield. The
first is the fault of our politics, where one party rejoices to break
what the other has bound. The makers of the Treaty are staunch enough,
as the Tories were under Pitt and Castlereagh, or the Whigs at the time
of Queen Anne, but sooner or later the others must come in. At the end
of the Marlborough wars we suddenly vamped up a peace and, left our
allies in the lurch, on account of a change in domestic politics. We
did the same with Frederick the Great, and would have done it in the
Napoleonic days if Fox could have controlled the country. And as to our
partners of the battlefield, how little we have ever said that is
hearty as to the splendid staunchness of the Prussians at Waterloo. You
have to read the Frenchman, Houssaye, to get a central view and to
understand the part they played. Think of old Blucher, seventy years
old, and ridden over by a regiment of charging cavalry the day before,
yet swearing that he would come to Wellington if he had to be strapped
to his horse. He nobly redeemed his promise.

The loss of the Prussians at Waterloo was not far short of our own. You
would not know it, to read our historians. And then the abuse of our
Belgian allies has been overdone. Some of them fought splendidly, and
one brigade of infantry had a share in the critical instant when the
battle was turned. This also you would not learn from British sources.
Look at our Portuguese allies also! They trained into magnificent
troops, and one of Wellington’s earnest desires was to have ten
thousand of them for his Waterloo campaign. It was a Portuguese who
first topped the rampart of Badajos. They have never had their due
credit, nor have the Spaniards either, for, though often defeated, it
was their unconquerable pertinacity which played a great part in the
struggle. No; I do not think that we are very amiable partners, but I
suppose that all national history may be open to a similar charge.

It must be confessed that Marbot’s details are occasionally a little
hard to believe. Never in the pages of Lever has there been such a
series of hairbreadth escapes and dare-devil exploits. Surely he
stretched it a little sometimes. You may remember his adventure at
Eylau—I think it was Eylau—how a cannon-ball, striking the top of his
helmet, paralyzed him by the concussion of his spine; and how, on a
Russian officer running forward to cut him down, his horse bit the
man’s face nearly off. This was the famous charger which savaged
everything until Marbot, having bought it for next to nothing, cured it
by thrusting a boiling leg of mutton into its mouth when it tried to
bite him. It certainly does need a robust faith to get over these
incidents. And yet, when one reflects upon the hundreds of battles and
skirmishes which a Napoleonic officer must have endured—how they must
have been the uninterrupted routine of his life from the first dark
hair upon his lip to the first grey one upon his head, it is
presumptuous to say what may or may not have been possible in such
unparalleled careers. At any rate, be it fact or fiction—fact it is, in
my opinion, with some artistic touching up of the high lights—there are
few books which I could not spare from my shelves better than the
memoirs of the gallant Marbot.

I dwell upon this particular book because it is the best; but take the
whole line, and there is not one which is not full of interest. Marbot
gives you the point of view of the officer. So does De Segur and De
Fezensac and Colonel Gonville, each in some different branch of the
service. But some are from the pens of the men in the ranks, and they
are even more graphic than the others. Here, for example, are the
papers of good old Cogniet, who was a grenadier of the Guard, and could
neither read nor write until after the great wars were over. A tougher
soldier never went into battle. Here is Sergeant Bourgogne, also with
his dreadful account of that nightmare campaign in Russia, and the
gallant Chevillet, trumpeter of Chasseurs, with his matter-of-fact
account of all that he saw, where the daily “combat” is sandwiched in
betwixt the real business of the day, which was foraging for his frugal
breakfast and supper. There is no better writing, and no easier
reading, than the records of these men of action.

A Briton cannot help asking himself, as he realizes what men these
were, what would have happened if 150,000 Cogniets and Bourgognes, with
Marbots to lead them, and the great captain of all time in the prime of
his vigour at their head, had made their landing in Kent? For months it
was touch-and-go. A single naval slip which left the Channel clear
would have been followed by an embarkation from Boulogne, which had
been brought by constant practice to so incredibly fine a point that
the last horse was aboard within two hours of the start. Any evening
might have seen the whole host upon the Pevensey Flats. What then? We
know what Humbert did with a handful of men in Ireland, and the story
is not reassuring. Conquest, of course, is unthinkable. The world in
arms could not do that. But Napoleon never thought of the conquest of
Britain. He has expressly disclaimed it. What he did contemplate was a
gigantic raid in which he would do so much damage that for years to
come England would be occupied at home in picking up the pieces,
instead of having energy to spend abroad in thwarting his Continental
plans.

Portsmouth, Plymouth, and Sheerness in flames, with London either
levelled to the ground or ransomed at his own figure—that was a more
feasible programme. Then, with the united fleets of conquered Europe at
his back, enormous armies and an inexhaustible treasury, swollen with
the ransom of Britain, he could turn to that conquest of America which
would win back the old colonies of France and leave him master of the
world. If the worst happened and he had met his Waterloo upon the South
Downs, he would have done again what he did in Egypt and once more in
Russia: hurried back to France in a swift vessel, and still had force
enough to hold his own upon the Continent. It would, no doubt, have
been a big stake to lay upon the table—150,000 of his best—but he could
play again if he lost; while, if he won, he cleared the board. A fine
game—if little Nelson had not stopped it, and with one blow fixed the
edge of salt water as the limit of Napoleon’s power.

There’s the cast of a medal on the top of that cabinet which will bring
it all close home to you. It is taken from the die of the medal which
Napoleon had arranged to issue on the day that he reached London. It
serves, at any rate, to show that his great muster was not a bluff, but
that he really did mean serious business. On one side is his head. On
the other France is engaged in strangling and throwing to earth a
curious fish-tailed creature, which stands for perfidious Albion.
“Frappe a Londres” is printed on one part of it, and “La Descente dans
Angleterre” upon another. Struck to commemorate a conquest, it remains
now as a souvenir of a fiasco. But it was a close call.

By the way, talking of Napoleon’s flight from Egypt, did you ever see a
curious little book called, if I remember right, “Intercepted Letters”?
No; I have no copy upon this shelf, but a friend is more fortunate. It
shows the almost incredible hatred which existed at the end of the
eighteenth century between the two nations, descending even to the most
petty personal annoyance. On this occasion the British Government
intercepted a mail-bag of letters coming from French officers in Egypt
to their friends at home, and they either published them, or at least
allowed them to be published, in the hope, no doubt, of causing
domestic complications. Was ever a more despicable action? But who
knows what other injuries had been inflicted to draw forth such a
retaliation? I have myself seen a burned and mutilated British mail
lying where De Wet had left it; but suppose the refinement of his
vengeance had gone so far as to publish it, what a thunder-bolt it
might have been!

As to the French officers, I have read their letters, though even after
a century one had a feeling of guilt when one did so. But, on the
whole, they are a credit to the writers, and give the impression of a
noble and chivalrous set of men. Whether they were all addressed to the
right people is another matter, and therein lay the poisoned sting of
this most un-British affair. As to the monstrous things which were done
upon the other side, remember the arrest of all the poor British
tourists and commercials who chanced to be in France when the war was
renewed in 1803. They had run over in all trust and confidence for a
little outing and change of air. They certainly got it, for Napoleon’s
steel grip fell upon them, and they rejoined their families in 1814. He
must have had a heart of adamant and a will of iron. Look at his
conduct over the naval prisoners. The natural proceeding would have
been to exchange them. For some reason he did not think it good policy
to do so. All representations from the British Government were set
aside, save in the case of the higher officers. Hence the miseries of
the hulks and the dreadful prison barracks in England. Hence also the
unhappy idlers of Verdun. What splendid loyalty there must have been in
those humble Frenchmen which never allowed them for one instant to turn
bitterly upon the author of all their great misfortunes. It is all
brought vividly home by the description of their prisons given by
Borrow in “Lavengro.” This is the passage—

“What a strange appearance had those mighty casernes, with their blank,
blind walls, without windows or grating, and their slanting roofs, out
of which, through orifices where the tiles had been removed, would be
protruded dozens of grim heads, feasting their prison-sick eyes on the
wide expanse of country unfolded from their airy height. Ah! there was
much misery in those casernes; and from those roofs, doubtless, many a
wistful look was turned in the direction of lovely France. Much had the
poor inmates to endure, and much to complain of, to the disgrace of
England be it said—of England, in general so kind and bountiful.
Rations of carrion meat, and bread from which I have seen the very
hounds occasionally turn away, were unworthy entertainment even for the
most ruffian enemy, when helpless and captive; and such, alas! was the
fare in those casernes. And then, those visits, or rather ruthless
inroads, called in the slang of the place ‘straw-plait hunts,’ when in
pursuit of a contraband article, which the prisoners, in order to
procure themselves a few of the necessaries and comforts of existence,
were in the habit of making, red-coated battalions were marched into
the prisons, who, with the bayonet’s point, carried havoc and ruin into
every poor convenience which ingenious wretchedness had been
endeavouring to raise around it; and then the triumphant exit with the
miserable booty, and worst of all, the accursed bonfire, on the barrack
parade of the plait contraband, beneath the view of glaring eyeballs
from those lofty roofs, amid the hurrahs of the troops frequently
drowned in the curses poured down from above like a tempest-shower, or
in the terrific war-whoop of ‘Vive l’Empereur!’”

There is a little vignette of Napoleon’s men in captivity. Here is
another which is worth preserving of the bearing of his veterans when
wounded on the field of battle. It is from Mercer’s recollections of
the Battle of Waterloo. Mercer had spent the day firing case into the
French cavalry at ranges from fifty to two hundred yards, losing
two-thirds of his own battery in the process. In the evening he had a
look at some of his own grim handiwork.

“I had satisfied my curiosity at Hougoumont, and was retracing my steps
up the hill when my attention was called to a group of wounded
Frenchmen by the calm, dignified, and soldier-like oration addressed by
one of them to the rest. I cannot, like Livy, compose a fine harangue
for my hero, and, of course, I could not retain the precise words, but
the import of them was to exhort them to bear their sufferings with
fortitude; not to repine, like women or children, at what every soldier
should have made up his mind to suffer as the fortune of war, but above
all, to remember that they were surrounded by Englishmen, before whom
they ought to be doubly careful not to disgrace themselves by
displaying such an unsoldier-like want of fortitude.

“The speaker was sitting on the ground with his lance stuck upright
beside him—an old veteran with thick bushy, grizzly beard, countenance
like a lion—a lancer of the old guard, and no doubt had fought in many
a field. One hand was flourished in the air as he spoke, the other,
severed at the wrist, lay on the earth beside him; one ball (case-shot,
probably) had entered his body, another had broken his leg. His
suffering, after a night of exposure so mangled, must have been great;
yet he betrayed it not. His bearing was that of a Roman, or perhaps an
Indian warrior, and I could fancy him concluding appropriately his
speech in the words of the Mexican king, ‘And I too; am I on a bed of
roses?’”

What a load of moral responsibility upon one man! But his mind was
insensible to moral responsibility. Surely if it had not been it must
have been crushed beneath it. Now, if you want to understand the
character of Napoleon—but surely I must take a fresh start before I
launch on so portentous a subject as that.

But before I leave the military men let me, for the credit of my own
country, after that infamous incident of the letters, indicate these
six well-thumbed volumes of “Napier’s History.” This is the story of
the great Peninsular War, by one who fought through it himself, and in
no history has a more chivalrous and manly account been given of one’s
enemy. Indeed, Napier seems to me to push it too far, for his
admiration appears to extend not only to the gallant soldiers who
opposed him, but to the character and to the ultimate aims of their
leader. He was, in fact, a political follower of Charles James Fox, and
his heart seems to have been with the enemy even at the moment when he
led his men most desperately against them. In the verdict of history
the action of those men who, in their honest zeal for freedom, inflamed
somewhat by political strife, turned against their own country, when it
was in truth the Champion of Freedom, and approved of a military despot
of the most uncompromising kind, seems wildly foolish.

But if Napier’s politics may seem strange, his soldiering was splendid,
and his prose among the very best that I know. There are passages in
that work—the one which describes the breach of Badajos, that of the
charge of the Fusiliers at Albuera, and that of the French advance at
Fuentes d’Onoro—which once read haunt the mind for ever. The book is a
worthy monument of a great national epic. Alas! for the pregnant
sentence with which it closes, “So ended the great war, and with it all
memory of the services of the veterans.” Was there ever a British war
of which the same might not have been written?

The quotation which I have given from Mercer’s book turns my thoughts
in the direction of the British military reminiscences of that period,
less numerous, less varied, and less central than the French, but full
of character and interest all the same. I have found that if I am
turned loose in a large library, after hesitating over covers for half
an hour or so, it is usually a book of soldier memoirs which I take
down. Man is never so interesting as when he is thoroughly in earnest,
and no one is so earnest as he whose life is at stake upon the event.
But of all types of soldier the best is the man who is keen upon his
work, and yet has general culture which enables him to see that work in
its due perspective, and to sympathize with the gentler aspirations of
mankind. Such a man is Mercer, an ice-cool fighter, with a sense of
discipline and decorum which prevented him from moving when a bombshell
was fizzing between his feet, and yet a man of thoughtful and
philosophic temperament, with a weakness for solitary musings, for
children, and for flowers. He has written for all time the classic
account of a great battle, seen from the point of view of a battery
commander. Many others of Wellington’s soldiers wrote their personal
reminiscences. You can get them, as I have them there, in the pleasant
abridgement of “Wellington’s Men” (admirably edited by Dr.
Fitchett)—Anton the Highlander, Harris the rifleman, and Kincaid of the
same corps. It is a most singular fate which has made an Australian
nonconformist clergyman the most sympathetic and eloquent reconstructor
of those old heroes, but it is a noble example of that unity of the
British race, which in fifty scattered lands still mourns or rejoices
over the same historic record.

And just one word, before I close down this over-long and too
discursive chatter, on the subject of yonder twin red volumes which
flank the shelf. They are Maxwell’s “History of Wellington,” and I do
not think you will find a better or more readable one. The reader must
ever feel towards the great soldier what his own immediate followers
felt, respect rather than affection. One’s failure to attain a more
affectionate emotion is alleviated by the knowledge that it was the
last thing which he invited or desired. “Don’t be a damned fool, sir!”
was his exhortation to the good citizen who had paid him a compliment.
It was a curious, callous nature, brusque and limited. The hardest
huntsman learns to love his hounds, but he showed no affection and a
good deal of contempt for the men who had been his instruments. “They
are the scum of the earth,” said he. “All English soldiers are fellows
who have enlisted for drink. That is the plain fact—they have all
enlisted for drink.” His general orders were full of undeserved
reproaches at a time when the most lavish praise could hardly have met
the real deserts of his army. When the wars were done he saw little,
save in his official capacity, of his old comrades-in-arms. And yet,
from major-general to drummer-boy, he was the man whom they would all
have elected to serve under, had the work to be done once more. As one
of them said, “The sight of his long nose was worth ten thousand men on
a field of battle.” They were themselves a leathery breed, and cared
little for the gentler amenities so long as the French were well
drubbed.

His mind, which was comprehensive and alert in warfare, was singularly
limited in civil affairs. As a statesman he was so constant an example
of devotion to duty, self-sacrifice, and high disinterested character,
that the country was the better for his presence. But he fiercely
opposed Catholic Emancipation, the Reform Bill, and everything upon
which our modern life is founded. He could never be brought to see that
a pyramid should stand on its base and not on its apex, and that the
larger the pyramid, the broader should be the base. Even in military
affairs he was averse from every change, and I know of no improvements
which came from his initiative during all those years when his
authority was supreme. The floggings which broke a man’s spirit and
self-respect, the leathern stock which hampered his movements, all the
old traditional regime found a champion in him. On the other hand, he
strongly opposed the introduction of the percussion cap as opposed to
the flint and steel in the musket. Neither in war nor in politics did
he rightly judge the future.

And yet in reading his letters and dispatches, one is surprised
sometimes at the incisive thought and its vigorous expression. There is
a passage in which he describes the way in which his soldiers would
occasionally desert into some town which he was besieging. “They knew,”
he writes, “that they must be taken, for when we lay our bloody hands
upon a place we are sure to take it, sooner or later; but they liked
being dry and under cover, and then that extraordinary caprice which
always pervades the English character! Our deserters are very badly
treated by the enemy; those who deserted in France were treated as the
lowest of mortals, slaves and scavengers. Nothing but English caprice
can account for it; just what makes our noblemen associate with
stage-coach drivers, and become stage-coach drivers themselves.” After
reading that passage, how often does the phrase “the extraordinary
caprice which always pervades the English character” come back as one
observes some fresh manifestation of it!

But let not my last note upon the great duke be a carping one. Rather
let my final sentence be one which will remind you of his frugal and
abstemious life, his carpetless floor and little camp bed, his precise
courtesy which left no humblest letter unanswered, his courage which
never flinched, his tenacity which never faltered, his sense of duty
which made his life one long unselfish effort on behalf of what seemed
to him to be the highest interest of the State. Go down and stand by
the huge granite sarcophagus in the dim light of the crypt of St.
Paul’s, and in the hush of that austere spot, cast back your mind to
the days when little England alone stood firm against the greatest
soldier and the greatest army that the world has ever known. Then you
feel what this dead man stood for, and you pray that we may still find
such another amongst us when the clouds gather once again.

You see that the literature of Waterloo is well represented in my small
military library. Of all books dealing with the personal view of the
matter, I think that “Siborne’s Letters,” which is a collection of the
narratives of surviving officers made by Siborne in the year 1827, is
the most interesting. Gronow’s account is also very vivid and
interesting. Of the strategical narratives, Houssaye’s book is my
favourite. Taken from the French point of view, it gets the actions of
the allies in truer perspective than any English or German account can
do; but there is a fascination about that great combat which makes
every narrative that bears upon it of enthralling interest.

Wellington used to say that too much was made of it, and that one would
imagine that the British Army had never fought a battle before. It was
a characteristic speech, but it must be admitted that the British Army
never had, as a matter of fact, for many centuries fought a battle
which was finally decisive of a great European war. There lies the
perennial interest of the incident, that it was the last act of that
long-drawn drama, and that to the very fall of the curtain no man could
tell how the play would end—“the nearest run thing that ever you
saw”—that was the victor’s description. It is a singular thing that
during those twenty-five years of incessant fighting the material and
methods of warfare made so little progress. So far as I know, there was
no great change in either between 1789 and 1805. The breech-loader,
heavy artillery, the ironclad, all great advances in the art of war,
have been invented in time of peace. There are some improvements so
obvious, and at the same time so valuable, that it is extraordinary
that they were not adopted. Signalling, for example, whether by
heliograph or by flag-waving, would have made an immense difference in
the Napoleonic campaigns. The principle of the semaphore was well
known, and Belgium, with its numerous windmills, would seem to be
furnished with natural semaphores. Yet in the four days during which
the campaign of Waterloo was fought, the whole scheme of military
operations on both sides was again and again imperilled, and finally in
the case of the French brought to utter ruin by lack of that
intelligence which could so easily have been conveyed. June 18th was at
intervals a sunshiny day—a four-inch glass mirror would have put
Napoleon in communication with Gruchy, and the whole history of Europe
might have been altered. Wellington himself suffered dreadfully from
defective information which might have been easily supplied. The
unexpected presence of the French army was first discovered at four in
the morning of June 15. It was of enormous importance to get the news
rapidly to Wellington at Brussels that he might instantly concentrate
his scattered forces on the best line of resistance—yet, through the
folly of sending only a single messenger, this vital information did
not reach him until three in the afternoon, the distance being thirty
miles. Again, when Blucher was defeated at Ligny on the 16th, it was of
enormous importance that Wellington should know at once the line of his
retreat so as to prevent the French from driving a wedge between them.
The single Prussian officer who was despatched with this information
was wounded, and never reached his destination, and it was only next
day that Wellington learned the Prussian plans. On what tiny things
does History depend!




IX.


The contemplation of my fine little regiment of French military memoirs
had brought me to the question of Napoleon himself, and you see that I
have a very fair line dealing with him also. There is Scott’s life,
which is not entirely a success. His ink was too precious to be shed in
such a venture. But here are the three volumes of the physician
Bourrienne—that Bourrienne who knew him so well. Does any one ever know
a man so well as his doctor? They are quite excellent and admirably
translated. Meneval also—the patient Meneval—who wrote for untold hours
to dictation at ordinary talking speed, and yet was expected to be
legible and to make no mistakes. At least his master could not fairly
criticize his legibility, for is it not on record that when Napoleon’s
holograph account of an engagement was laid before the President of the
Senate, the worthy man thought that it was a drawn plan of the battle?
Meneval survived his master and has left an excellent and intimate
account of him. There is Constant’s account, also written from that
point of view in which it is proverbial that no man is a hero. But of
all the vivid terrible pictures of Napoleon the most haunting is by a
man who never saw him and whose book was not directly dealing with him.
I mean Taine’s account of him, in the first volume of “Les Origines de
la France Contemporaine.” You can never forget it when once you have
read it. He produces his effect in a wonderful, and to me a novel, way.
He does not, for example, say in mere crude words that Napoleon had a
more than mediaeval Italian cunning. He presents a succession of
documents—gives a series of contemporary instances to prove it. Then,
having got that fixed in your head by blow after blow, he passes on to
another phase of his character, his coldhearted amorousness, his power
of work, his spoiled child wilfulness, or some other quality, and piles
up his illustrations of that. Instead, for example, of saying that the
Emperor had a marvellous memory for detail, we have the account of the
head of Artillery laying the list of all the guns in France before his
master, who looked over it and remarked, “Yes, but you have omitted two
in a fort near Dieppe.” So the man is gradually etched in with
indelible ink. It is a wonderful figure of which you are conscious in
the end, the figure of an archangel, but surely of an archangel of
darkness.

We will, after Taine’s method, take one fact and let it speak for
itself. Napoleon left a legacy in a codicil to his will to a man who
tried to assassinate Wellington. There is the mediaeval Italian again!
He was no more a Corsican than the Englishman born in India is a
Hindoo. Read the lives of the Borgias, the Sforzas, the Medicis, and of
all the lustful, cruel, broad-minded, art-loving, talented despots of
the little Italian States, including Genoa, from which the Buonapartes
migrated. There at once you get the real descent of the man, with all
the stigmata clear upon him—the outward calm, the inward passion, the
layer of snow above the volcano, everything which characterized the old
despots of his native land, the pupils of Machiavelli, but all raised
to the dimensions of genius. You can whitewash him as you may, but you
will never get a layer thick enough to cover the stain of that
cold-blooded deliberate endorsement of his noble adversary’s
assassination.

Another book which gives an extraordinarily vivid picture of the man is
this one—the Memoirs of Madame de Remusat. She was in daily contact
with him at the Court, and she studied him with those quick critical
eyes of a clever woman, the most unerring things in life when they are
not blinded by love. If you have read those pages, you feel that you
know him as if you had yourself seen and talked with him. His singular
mixture of the small and the great, his huge sweep of imagination, his
very limited knowledge, his intense egotism, his impatience of
obstacles, his boorishness, his gross impertinence to women, his
diabolical playing upon the weak side of every one with whom he came in
contact—they make up among them one of the most striking of historical
portraits.

Most of my books deal with the days of his greatness, but here, you
see, is a three-volume account of those weary years at St. Helena. Who
can help pitying the mewed eagle? And yet if you play the great game
you must pay a stake. This was the same man who had a royal duke shot
in a ditch because he was a danger to his throne. Was not he himself a
danger to every throne in Europe? Why so harsh a retreat as St. Helena,
you say? Remember that he had been put in a milder one before, that he
had broken away from it, and that the lives of fifty thousand men had
paid for the mistaken leniency. All this is forgotten now, and the
pathetic picture of the modern Prometheus chained to his rock and
devoured by the vultures of his own bitter thoughts, is the one
impression which the world has retained. It is always so much easier to
follow the emotions than the reason, especially where a cheap
magnanimity and second-hand generosity are involved. But reason must
still insist that Europe’s treatment of Napoleon was not vindictive,
and that Hudson Lowe was a man who tried to live up to the trust which
had been committed to him by his country.

It was certainly not a post from which any one would hope for credit.
If he were slack and easy-going all would be well. But there would be
the chance of a second flight with its consequences. If he were strict
and assiduous he would be assuredly represented as a petty tyrant. “I
am glad when you are on outpost,” said Lowe’s general in some campaign,
“for then I am sure of a sound rest.” He was on outpost at St. Helena,
and because he was true to his duties Europe (France included) had a
sound rest. But he purchased it at the price of his own reputation. The
greatest schemer in the world, having nothing else on which to vent his
energies, turned them all to the task of vilifying his guardian. It was
natural enough that he who had never known control should not brook it
now. It is natural also that sentimentalists who have not thought of
the details should take the Emperor’s point of view. What is
deplorable, however, is that our own people should be misled by
one-sided accounts, and that they should throw to the wolves a man who
was serving his country in a post of anxiety and danger, with such
responsibility upon him as few could ever have endured. Let them
remember Montholon’s remark: “An angel from heaven would not have
satisfied us.” Let them recall also that Lowe with ample material never
once troubled to state his own case. “_Je fais mon devoir et suis
indifférent pour le reste_,” said he, in his interview with the
Emperor. They were no idle words.

Apart from this particular epoch, French literature, which is so rich
in all its branches, is richest of all in its memoirs. Whenever there
was anything of interest going forward there was always some kindly
gossip who knew all about it, and was ready to set it down for the
benefit of posterity. Our own history has not nearly enough of these
charming sidelights. Look at our sailors in the Napoleonic wars, for
example. They played an epoch-making part. For nearly twenty years
Freedom was a Refugee upon the seas. Had our navy been swept away, then
all Europe would have been one organized despotism. At times everybody
was against us, fighting against their own direct interests under the
pressure of that terrible hand. We fought on the waters with the
French, with the Spaniards, with the Danes, with the Russians, with the
Turks, even with our American kinsmen. Middies grew into post-captains,
and admirals into dotards during that prolonged struggle. And what have
we in literature to show for it all? Marryat’s novels, many of which
are founded upon personal experience, Nelson’s and Collingwood’s
letters, Lord Cochrane’s biography—that is about all. I wish we had
more of Collingwood, for he wielded a fine pen. Do you remember the
sonorous opening of his Trafalgar message to his captains?—

“The ever to be lamented death of Lord Viscount Nelson, Duke of Bronte,
the Commander-in-Chief, who fell in the action of the 21st, in the arms
of Victory, covered with glory, whose memory will be ever dear to the
British Navy and the British Nation; whose zeal for the honour of his
king and for the interests of his country will be ever held up as a
shining example for a British seaman—leaves to me a duty to return
thanks, etc., etc.”

It was a worthy sentence to carry such a message, written too in a
raging tempest, with sinking vessels all around him. But in the main it
is a poor crop from such a soil. No doubt our sailors were too busy to
do much writing, but none the less one wonders that among so many
thousands there were not some to understand what a treasure their
experiences would be to their descendants. I can call to mind the old
three-deckers which used to rot in Portsmouth Harbour, and I have often
thought, could they tell their tales, what a missing chapter in our
literature they could supply.

It is not only in Napoleonic memoirs that the French are so fortunate.
The almost equally interesting age of Louis XIV. produced an even more
wonderful series. If you go deeply into the subject you are amazed by
their number, and you feel as if every one at the Court of the Roi
Soleil had done what he (or she) could to give away their neighbours.
Just to take the more obvious, there are St. Simon’s Memoirs—those in
themselves give us a more comprehensive and intimate view of the age
than anything I know of which treats of the times of Queen Victoria.
Then there is St. Evremond, who is nearly as complete. Do you want the
view of a woman of quality? There are the letters of Madame de Sevigne
(eight volumes of them), perhaps the most wonderful series of letters
that any woman has ever penned. Do you want the confessions of a rake
of the period? Here are the too salacious memoirs of the mischievous
Duc de Roquelaure, not reading for the nursery certainly, not even for
the boudoir, but a strange and very intimate picture of the times. All
these books fit into each other, for the characters of the one reappear
in the others. You come to know them quite familiarly before you have
finished, their loves and their hates, their duels, their intrigues,
and their ultimate fortunes. If you do not care to go so deeply into it
you have only to put Julia Pardoe’s four-volumed “Court of Louis XIV.”
upon your shelf, and you will find a very admirable condensation—or a
distillation rather, for most of the salt is left behind. There is
another book too—that big one on the bottom shelf—which holds it all
between its brown and gold covers. An extravagance that—for it cost me
some sovereigns—but it is something to have the portraits of all that
wonderful galaxy, of Louis, of the devout Maintenon, of the frail
Montespan, of Bossuet, Fénelon, Molière, Racine, Pascal, Condé,
Turenne, and all the saints and sinners of the age. If you want to make
yourself a present, and chance upon a copy of “The Court and Times of
Louis XIV.,” you will never think that your money has been wasted.

Well, I have bored you unduly, my patient friend, with my love of
memoirs, Napoleonic and otherwise, which give a touch of human interest
to the arid records of history. Not that history should be arid. It
ought to be the most interesting subject upon earth, the story of
ourselves, of our forefathers, of the human race, the events which made
us what we are, and wherein, if Weismann’s views hold the field, some
microscopic fraction of this very body which for the instant we chance
to inhabit may have borne a part. But unfortunately the power of
accumulating knowledge and that of imparting it are two very different
things, and the uninspired historian becomes merely the dignified
compiler of an enlarged almanac. Worst of all, when a man does come
along with fancy and imagination, who can breathe the breath of life
into the dry bones, it is the fashion for the dryasdusts to belabour
him, as one who has wandered away from the orthodox path and must
necessarily be inaccurate. So Froude was attacked. So also Macaulay in
his day. But both will be read when the pedants are forgotten. If I
were asked my very ideal of how history should be written, I think I
should point to those two rows on yonder shelf, the one M’Carthy’s
“History of Our Own Times,” the other Lecky’s “History of England in
the Eighteenth Century.” Curious that each should have been written by
an Irishman, and that though of opposite politics and living in an age
when Irish affairs have caused such bitterness, both should be
conspicuous not merely for all literary graces, but for that broad
toleration which sees every side of a question, and handles every
problem from the point of view of the philosophic observer and never of
the sectarian partisan.

By the way, talking of history, have you read Parkman’s works? He was,
I think, among the very greatest of the historians, and yet one seldom
hears his name. A New England man by birth, and writing principally of
the early history of the American Settlements and of French Canada, it
is perhaps excusable that he should have no great vogue in England, but
even among Americans I have found many who have not read him. There are
four of his volumes in green and gold down yonder, “The Jesuits in
Canada,” and “Frontenac,” but there are others, all of them well worth
reading, “Pioneers of France,” “Montcalm and Wolfe,” “Discovery of the
Great West,” etc. Some day I hope to have a complete set.

Taking only that one book, “The Jesuits in Canada,” it is worth a
reputation in itself. And how noble a tribute is this which a man of
Puritan blood pays to that wonderful Order! He shows how in the heyday
of their enthusiasm these brave soldiers of the Cross invaded Canada as
they did China and every other place where danger was to be faced, and
a horrible death to be found. I don’t care what faith a man may
profess, or whether he be a Christian at all, but he cannot read these
true records without feeling that the very highest that man has ever
evolved in sanctity and devotion was to be found among these marvellous
men. They were indeed the pioneers of civilization, for apart from
doctrines they brought among the savages the highest European culture,
and in their own deportment an object-lesson of how chastely,
austerely, and nobly men could live. France has sent myriads of brave
men on to her battlefields, but in all her long record of glory I do
not think that she can point to any courage so steadfast and so
absolutely heroic as that of the men of the Iroquois Mission.

How nobly they lived makes the body of the book, how serenely they died
forms the end to it. It is a tale which cannot even now be read without
a shudder—a nightmare of horrors. Fanaticism may brace a man to hurl
himself into oblivion, as the Mahdi’s hordes did before Khartoum, but
one feels that it is at least a higher development of such emotion,
where men slowly and in cold blood endure so thankless a life, and
welcome so dreadful an end. Every faith can equally boast its martyrs—a
painful thought, since it shows how many thousands must have given
their blood for error—but in testifying to their faith these brave men
have testified to something more important still, to the subjugation of
the body and to the absolute supremacy of the dominating spirit.

The story of Father Jogue is but one of many, and yet it is worth
recounting, as showing the spirit of the men. He also was on the
Iroquois Mission, and was so tortured and mutilated by his sweet
parishioners that the very dogs used to howl at his distorted figure.
He made his way back to France, not for any reason of personal rest or
recuperation, but because he needed a special dispensation to say Mass.
The Catholic Church has a regulation that a priest shall not be
deformed, so that the savages with their knives had wrought better than
they knew. He received his dispensation and was sent for by Louis XIV.,
who asked him what he could do for him. No doubt the assembled
courtiers expected to hear him ask for the next vacant Bishopric. What
he did actually ask for, as the highest favour, was to be sent back to
the Iroquois Mission, where the savages signalized his arrival by
burning him alive.

Parkman is worth reading, if it were only for his account of the
Indians. Perhaps the very strangest thing about them, and the most
unaccountable, is their small numbers. The Iroquois were one of the
most formidable of tribes. They were of the Five Nations, whose
scalping-parties wandered over an expanse of thousands of square miles.
Yet there is good reason to doubt whether the whole five nations could
have put as many thousand warriors in the field. It was the same with
all the other tribes of Northern Americans, both in the east, the
north, and the west. Their numbers were always insignificant. And yet
they had that huge country to themselves, the best of climates, and
plenty of food. Why was it that they did not people it thickly? It may
be taken as a striking example of the purpose and design which run
through the affairs of men, that at the very moment when the old world
was ready to overflow the new world was empty to receive it. Had North
America been peopled as China is peopled, the Europeans might have
founded some settlements, but could never have taken possession of the
continent. Buffon has made the striking remark that the creative power
appeared to have never had great vigour in America. He alluded to the
abundance of the flora and fauna as compared with that of other great
divisions of the earth’s surface. Whether the numbers of the Indians
are an illustration of the same fact, or whether there is some special
cause, is beyond my very modest scientific attainments. When one
reflects upon the countless herds of bison which used to cover the
Western plains, or marks in the present day the race statistics of the
French Canadians at one end of the continent, and of the Southern negro
at the other, it seems absurd to suppose that there is any geographical
reason against Nature being as prolific here as elsewhere. However,
these be deeper waters, and with your leave we will get back into my
usual six-inch wading-depth once more.




X.


I don’t know how those two little books got in there. They are Henley’s
“Song of the Sword” and “Book of Verses.” They ought to be over yonder
in the rather limited Poetry Section. Perhaps it is that I like his
work so, whether it be prose or verse, and so have put them ready to my
hand. He was a remarkable man, a man who was very much greater than his
work, great as some of his work was. I have seldom known a personality
more magnetic and stimulating. You left his presence, as a battery
leaves a generating station, charged up and full. He made you feel what
a lot of work there was to be done, and how glorious it was to be able
to do it, and how needful to get started upon it that very hour. With
the frame and the vitality of a giant he was cruelly bereft of all
outlet for his strength, and so distilled it off in hot words, in warm
sympathy, in strong prejudices, in all manner of human and stimulating
emotions. Much of the time and energy which might have built an
imperishable name for himself was spent in encouraging others; but it
was not waste, for he left his broad thumb-mark upon all that passed
beneath it. A dozen second-hand Henleys are fortifying our literature
to-day.

Alas that we have so little of his very best! for that very best was
the finest of our time. Few poets ever wrote sixteen consecutive lines
more noble and more strong than those which begin with the well-known
quatrain—

“Out of the night that covers me,
    Black as the pit from Pole to Pole,
I thank whatever Gods there be
    For my unconquerable soul.”


It is grand literature, and it is grand pluck too; for it came from a
man who, through no fault of his own, had been pruned, and pruned
again, like an ill-grown shrub, by the surgeon’s knife. When he said—

“In the fell clutch of Circumstance
    I have not winced nor cried aloud,
Beneath the bludgeonings of Chance
    My head is bloody but unbowed.”


It was not what Lady Byron called “the mimic woe” of the poet, but it
was rather the grand defiance of the Indian warrior at the stake, whose
proud soul can hold in hand his quivering body.

There were two quite distinct veins of poetry in Henley, each the very
extreme from the other. The one was heroic, gigantic, running to large
sweeping images and thundering words. Such are the “Song of the Sword”
and much more that he has written, like the wild singing of some
Northern scald. The other, and to my mind both the more characteristic
and the finer side of his work, is delicate, precise, finely etched,
with extraordinarily vivid little pictures drawn in carefully phrased
and balanced English. Such are the “Hospital Verses,” while the “London
Voluntaries” stand midway between the two styles. What! you have not
read the “Hospital Verses!” Then get the “Book of Verses” and read them
without delay. You will surely find something there which, for good or
ill, is unique. You can name—or at least I can name—nothing to compare
it with. Goldsmith and Crabbe have written of indoor themes; but their
monotonous, if majestic metre, wearies the modern reader. But this is
so varied, so flexible, so dramatic. It stands by itself. Confound the
weekly journals and all the other lightning conductors which caused
such a man to pass away, and to leave a total output of about five
booklets behind him!

However, all this is an absolute digression, for the books had no
business in this shelf at all. This corner is meant for chronicles of
various sorts. Here are three in a line, which carry you over a
splendid stretch of French (which usually means European) history,
each, as luck would have it, beginning just about the time when the
other leaves off. The first is Froissart, the second de Monstrelet, and
the third de Comines. When you have read the three you have the best
contemporary account first hand of considerably more than a century—a
fair slice out of the total written record of the human race.

Froissart is always splendid. If you desire to avoid the mediaeval
French, which only a specialist can read with pleasure, you can get
Lord Berners’ almost equally mediaeval, but very charming English, or
you can turn to a modern translation, such as this one of Johnes. A
single page of Lord Berners is delightful; but it is a strain, I think,
to read bulky volumes in an archaic style. Personally, I prefer the
modern, and even with that you have shown some patience before you have
reached the end of that big second tome.

I wonder whether, at the time, the old Hainault Canon had any idea of
what he was doing—whether it ever flashed across his mind that the day
might come when his book would be the one great authority, not only
about the times in which he lived, but about the whole institution of
chivalry? I fear that it is far more likely that his whole object was
to gain some mundane advantage from the various barons and knights
whose names and deeds be recounts. He has left it on record, for
example, that when he visited the Court of England he took with him a
handsomely-bound copy of his work; and, doubtless, if one could follow
the good Canon one would find his journeys littered with similar copies
which were probably expensive gifts to the recipient, for what return
would a knightly soul make for a book which enshrined his own valour?

But without looking too curiously into his motives, it must be admitted
that the work could not have been done more thoroughly. There is
something of Herodotus in the Canon’s cheery, chatty, garrulous,
take-it-or-leave-it manner. But he has the advantage of the old Greek
in accuracy. Considering that he belonged to the same age which gravely
accepted the travellers’ tales of Sir John Maundeville, it is, I think,
remarkable how careful and accurate the chronicler is. Take, for
example, his description of Scotland and the Scotch. Some would give
the credit to Jean-le-Bel, but that is another matter. Scotch
descriptions are a subject over which a fourteenth-century Hainaulter
might fairly be allowed a little scope for his imagination. Yet we can
see that the account must on the whole have been very correct. The
Galloway nags, the girdle-cakes, the bagpipes—every little detail rings
true. Jean-le-Bel was actually present in a Border campaign, and from
him Froissart got his material; but he has never attempted to embroider
it, and its accuracy, where we can to some extent test it, must
predispose us to accept his accounts where they are beyond our
confirmation.

But the most interesting portion of old Froissart’s work is that which
deals with the knights and the knight-errants of his time, their deeds,
their habits, their methods of talking. It is true that he lived
himself just a little after the true heyday of chivalry; but he was
quite early enough to have met many of the men who had been looked upon
as the flower of knighthood of the time. His book was read too, and
commented on by these very men (as many of them as could read), and so
we may take it that it was no fancy portrait, but a correct picture of
these soldiers which is to be found in it. The accounts are always
consistent. If you collate the remarks and speeches of the knights (as
I have had occasion to do) you will find a remarkable uniformity
running through them. We may believe then that this really does
represent the kind of men who fought at Crecy and at Poictiers, in the
age when both the French and the Scottish kings were prisoners in
London, and England reached a pitch of military glory which has perhaps
never been equalled in her history.

In one respect these knights differ from anything which we have had
presented to us in our historical romances. To turn to the supreme
romancer, you will find that Scott’s mediaeval knights were usually
muscular athletes in the prime of life: Bois-Guilbert, Front-de-Bœuf,
Richard, Ivanhoe, Count Robert—they all were such. But occasionally the
most famous of Froissart’s knights were old, crippled and blinded.
Chandos, the best lance of his day, must have been over seventy when he
lost his life through being charged upon the side on which he had
already lost an eye. He was well on to that age when he rode out from
the English army and slew the Spanish champion, big Marten Ferrara,
upon the morning of Navaretta. Youth and strength were very useful, no
doubt, especially where heavy armour had to be carried, but once on the
horse’s back the gallant steed supplied the muscles. In an English
hunting-field many a doddering old man, when he is once firmly seated
in his familiar saddle, can give points to the youngsters at the game.
So it was among the knights, and those who had outlived all else could
still carry to the wars their wiliness, their experience with arms,
and, above all, their cool and undaunted courage.

Beneath his varnish of chivalry, it cannot be gainsayed that the knight
was often a bloody and ferocious barbarian. There was little quarter in
his wars, save when a ransom might be claimed. But with all his
savagery, he was a light-hearted creature, like a formidable boy
playing a dreadful game. He was true also to his own curious code, and,
so far as his own class went, his feelings were genial and sympathetic,
even in warfare. There was no personal feeling or bitterness as there
might be now in a war between Frenchmen and Germans. On the contrary,
the opponents were very softspoken and polite to each other. “Is there
any small vow of which I may relieve you?” “Would you desire to attempt
some small deed of arms upon me?” And in the midst of a fight they
would stop for a breather, and converse amicably the while, with many
compliments upon each other’s prowess. When Seaton the Scotsman had
exchanged as many blows as he wished with a company of French knights,
he said, “Thank you, gentlemen, thank you!” and galloped away. An
English knight made a vow, “for his own advancement and the exaltation
of his lady,” that he would ride into the hostile city of Paris, and
touch with his lance the inner barrier. The whole story is most
characteristic of the times. As he galloped up, the French knights
around the barrier, seeing that he was under vow, made no attack upon
him, and called out to him that he had carried himself well. As he
returned, however, there stood an unmannerly butcher with a pole-axe
upon the side-walk, who struck him as he passed, and killed him. Here
ends the chronicler; but I have not the least doubt that the butcher
had a very evil time at the hands of the French knights, who would not
stand by and see one of their own order, even if he were an enemy, meet
so plebeian an end.

De Comines, as a chronicler, is less quaint and more conventional than
Froissart, but the writer of romance can dig plenty of stones out of
that quarry for the use of his own little building. Of course Quentin
Durward has come bodily out of the pages of De Comines. The whole
history of Louis XI. and his relations with Charles the Bold, the
strange life at Plessis-le-Tours, the plebeian courtiers, the barber
and the hangman, the astrologers, the alternations of savage cruelty
and of slavish superstition—it is all set forth here. One would imagine
that such a monarch was unique, that such a mixture of strange
qualities and monstrous crimes could never be matched, and yet like
causes will always produce like results. Read Walewski’s “Life of Ivan
the Terrible,” and you will find that more than a century later Russia
produced a monarch even more diabolical, but working exactly on the
same lines as Louis, even down to small details. The same cruelty, the
same superstition, the same astrologers, the same low-born associates,
the same residence outside the influence of the great cities—a parallel
could hardly be more complete. If you have not supped too full of
horrors when you have finished Ivan, then pass on to the same author’s
account of Peter the Great. What a land! What a succession of monarchs!
Blood and snow and iron! Both Ivan and Peter killed their own sons. And
there is a hideous mockery of religion running through it all which
gives it a grotesque horror of its own. We have had our Henry the
Eighth, but our very worst would have been a wise and benevolent rule
in Russia.

Talking of romance and of chivalry, that tattered book down yonder has
as much between its disreputable covers as most that I know. It is
Washington Irving’s “Conquest of Granada.” I do not know where he got
his material for this book—from Spanish Chronicles, I presume—but the
wars between the Moors and the Christian knights must have been among
the most chivalrous of exploits. I could not name a book which gets the
beauty and the glamour of it better than this one, the lance-heads
gleaming in the dark defiles, the red bale fires glowing on the crags,
the stern devotion of the mail-clad Christians, the debonnaire and
courtly courage of the dashing Moslem. Had Washington Irving written
nothing else, that book alone should have forced the door of every
library. I love all his books, for no man wrote fresher English with a
purer style; but of them all it is still “The Conquest of Granada” to
which I turn most often.

To hark back for a moment to history as seen in romances, here are two
exotics side by side, which have a flavour that is new. They are a
brace of foreign novelists, each of whom, so far as I know, has only
two books. This green-and-gold volume contains both the works of the
Pomeranian Meinhold in an excellent translation by Lady Wilde. The
first is “Sidonia the Sorceress,” the second, “The Amber Witch.” I
don’t know where one may turn for a stranger view of the Middle Ages,
the quaint details of simple life, with sudden intervals of grotesque
savagery. The most weird and barbarous things are made human and
comprehensible. There is one incident which haunts one after one has
read it, where the executioner chaffers with the villagers as to what
price they will give him for putting some young witch to the torture,
running them up from a barrel of apples to a barrel and a half, on the
grounds that he is now old and rheumatic, and that the stooping and
straining is bad for his back. It should be done on a sloping hill, he
explains, so that the “dear little children” may see it easily. Both
“Sidonia” and “The Amber Witch” give such a picture of old Germany as I
have never seen elsewhere.

But Meinhold belongs to a bygone generation. This other author, in whom
I find a new note, and one of great power, is Merejkowski, who is, if I
mistake not, young and with his career still before him. “The
Forerunner” and “The Death of the Gods” are the only two books of his
which I have been able to obtain, but the pictures of Renaissance Italy
in the one, and of declining Rome in the other, are in my opinion among
the masterpieces of fiction. I confess that as I read them I was
pleased to find how open my mind was to new impressions, for one of the
greatest mental dangers which comes upon a man as he grows older is
that he should become so attached to old favourites that he has no room
for the new-comer, and persuades himself that the days of great things
are at an end because his own poor brain is getting ossified. You have
but to open any critical paper to see how common is the disease, but a
knowledge of literary history assures us that it has always been the
same, and that if the young writer is discouraged by adverse
comparisons it has been the common lot from the beginning. He has but
one resource, which is to pay no heed to criticism, but to try to
satisfy his own highest standard and leave the rest to time and the
public. Here is a little bit of doggerel, pinned, as you see, beside my
bookcase, which may in a ruffled hour bring peace and guidance to some
younger brother—

“Critics kind—never mind!
Critics flatter—no matter!
Critics blame—all the same!
Critics curse—none the worse!
Do your best— —— the rest!”




XI.


I have been talking in the past tense of heroes and of knight-errants,
but surely their day is not yet passed. When the earth has all been
explored, when the last savage has been tamed, when the final cannon
has been scrapped, and the world has settled down into unbroken virtue
and unutterable dulness, men will cast their thoughts back to our age,
and will idealize our romance and—our courage, even as we do that of
our distant forbears. “It is wonderful what these people did with their
rude implements and their limited appliances!” That is what they will
say when they read of our explorations, our voyages, and our wars.

Now, take that first book on my travel shelf. It is Knight’s “Cruise of
the _Falcon_.” Nature was guilty of the pun which put this soul into a
body so named. Read this simple record and tell me if there is anything
in Hakluyt more wonderful. Two landsmen—solicitors, if I remember
right—go down to Southampton Quay. They pick up a long-shore youth, and
they embark in a tiny boat in which they put to sea. Where do they turn
up? At Buenos Ayres. Thence they penetrate to Paraguay, return to the
West Indies, sell their little boat there, and so home. What could the
Elizabethan mariners have done more? There are no Spanish galleons now
to vary the monotony of such a voyage, but had there been I am very
certain our adventurers would have had their share of the doubloons.
But surely it was the nobler when done out of the pure lust of
adventure and in answer to the call of the sea, with no golden bait to
draw them on. The old spirit still lives, disguise it as you will with
top hats, frock coats, and all prosaic settings. Perhaps even they also
will seem romantic when centuries have blurred them.

Another book which shows the romance and the heroism which still linger
upon earth is that large copy of the “Voyage of the _Discovery_ in the
Antarctic” by Captain Scott. Written in plain sailor fashion with no
attempt at over-statement or colour, it none the less (or perhaps all
the more) leaves a deep impression upon the mind. As one reads it, and
reflects on what one reads, one seems to get a clear view of just those
qualities which make the best kind of Briton. Every nation produces
brave men. Every nation has men of energy. But there is a certain type
which mixes its bravery and its energy with a gentle modesty and a
boyish good-humour, and it is just this type which is the highest. Here
the whole expedition seem to have been imbued with the spirit of their
commander. No flinching, no grumbling, every discomfort taken as a
jest, no thought of self, each working only for the success of the
enterprise. When you have read of such privations so endured and so
chronicled, it makes one ashamed to show emotion over the small
annoyances of daily life. Read of Scott’s blinded, scurvy-struck party
staggering on to their goal, and then complain, if you can, of the heat
of a northern sun, or the dust of a country road.

That is one of the weaknesses of modern life. We complain too much. We
are not ashamed of complaining. Time was when it was otherwise—when it
was thought effeminate to complain. The Gentleman should always be the
Stoic, with his soul too great to be affected by the small troubles of
life. “You look cold, sir,” said an English sympathizer to a French
_emigré_. The fallen noble drew himself up in his threadbare coat.
“Sir,” said he, “a gentleman is never cold.” One’s consideration for
others as well as one’s own self-respect should check the grumble. This
self-suppression, and also the concealment of pain are two of the old
_noblesse oblige_ characteristics which are now little more than a
tradition. Public opinion should be firmer on the matter. The man who
must hop because his shin is hacked, or wring his hand because his
knuckles are bruised should be made to feel that he is an object not of
pity, but of contempt.

The tradition of Arctic exploration is a noble one among Americans as
well as ourselves. The next book is a case in point. It is Greely’s
“Arctic Service,” and it is a worthy shelf-companion to Scott’s
“Account of the Voyage of the _Discovery_.” There are incidents in this
book which one can never forget. The episode of those twenty-odd men
lying upon that horrible bluff, and dying one a day from cold and
hunger and scurvy, is one which dwarfs all our puny tragedies of
romance. And the gallant starving leader giving lectures on abstract
science in an attempt to take the thoughts of the dying men away from
their sufferings—what a picture! It is bad to suffer from cold and bad
to suffer from hunger, and bad to live in the dark; but that men could
do all these things for six months on end, and that some should live to
tell the tale, is, indeed, a marvel. What a world of feeling lies in
the exclamation of the poor dying lieutenant: “Well, this _is_
wretched,” he groaned, as he turned his face to the wall.

The Anglo-Celtic race has always run to individualism, and yet there is
none which is capable of conceiving and carrying out a finer ideal of
discipline. There is nothing in Roman or Grecian annals, not even the
lava-baked sentry at Pompeii, which gives a more sternly fine
object-lesson in duty than the young recruits of the British army who
went down in their ranks on the Birkenhead. And this expedition of
Greely’s gave rise to another example which seems to me hardly less
remarkable. You may remember, if you have read the book, that even when
there were only about eight unfortunates still left, hardly able to
move for weakness and hunger, the seven took the odd man out upon the
ice, and shot him dead for breach of discipline. The whole grim
proceeding was carried out with as much method and signing of papers,
as if they were all within sight of the Capitol at Washington. His
offence had consisted, so far as I can remember, of stealing and eating
the thong which bound two portions of the sledge together, something
about as appetizing as a bootlace. It is only fair to the commander to
say, however, that it was one of a series of petty thefts, and that the
thong of a sledge might mean life or death to the whole party.

Personally I must confess that anything bearing upon the Arctic Seas is
always of the deepest interest to me. He who has once been within the
borders of that mysterious region, which can be both the most lovely
and the most repellent upon earth, must always retain something of its
glamour. Standing on the confines of known geography I have shot the
southward flying ducks, and have taken from their gizzards pebbles
which they have swallowed in some land whose shores no human foot has
trod. The memory of that inexpressible air, of the great ice-girt lakes
of deep blue water, of the cloudless sky shading away into a light
green and then into a cold yellow at the horizon, of the noisy
companionable birds, of the huge, greasy-backed water animals, of the
slug-like seals, startlingly black against the dazzling whiteness of
the ice—all of it will come back to a man in his dreams, and will seem
little more than some fantastic dream itself, so removed is it from the
main stream of his life. And then to play a fish a hundred tons in
weight, and worth two thousand pounds—but what in the world has all
this to do with my bookcase?

Yet it has its place in my main line of thought, for it leads me
straight to the very next upon the shelf, Bullen’s “Cruise of the
_Cachelot_,” a book which is full of the glamour and the mystery of the
sea, marred only by the brutality of those who go down to it in ships.
This is the sperm-whale fishing, an open-sea affair, and very different
from that Greenland ice groping in which I served a seven-months’
apprenticeship. Both, I fear, are things of the past—certainly the
northern fishing is so, for why should men risk their lives to get oil
when one has but to sink a pipe in the ground. It is the more fortunate
then that it should have been handled by one of the most virile writers
who has described a sailor’s life. Bullen’s English at its best rises
to a great height. If I wished to show how high, I would take that next
book down, “Sea Idylls.”

How is this, for example, if you have an ear for the music of prose? It
is a simple paragraph out of the magnificent description of a long calm
in the tropics.

“A change, unusual as unwholesome, came over the bright blue of the
sea. No longer did it reflect, as in a limpid mirror, the splendour of
the sun, the sweet silvery glow of the moon, or the coruscating
clusters of countless stars. Like the ashen-grey hue that bedims the
countenance of the dying, a filmy greasy skin appeared to overspread
the recent loveliness of the ocean surface. The sea was sick, stagnant,
and foul, from its turbid waters arose a miasmatic vapour like a breath
of decay, which clung clammily to the palate and dulled all the senses.
Drawn by some strange force, from the unfathomable depths below, eerie
shapes sought the surface, blinking glassily at the unfamiliar glare
they had exchanged for their native gloom—uncouth creatures bedight
with tasselled fringes like weed-growths waving around them,
fathom-long, medusae with coloured spots like eyes clustering all over
their transparent substance, wriggling worm-like forms of such elusive
matter that the smallest exposure to the sun melted them, and they were
not. Lower down, vast pale shadows creep sluggishly along, happily
undistinguishable as yet, but adding a half-familiar flavour to the
strange, faint smell that hung about us.”

Take the whole of that essay which describes a calm in the Tropics, or
take the other one: “Sunrise as seen from the Crow’s-nest,” and you
must admit that there have been few finer pieces of descriptive English
in our time. If I had to choose a sea library of only a dozen volumes I
should certainly give Bullen two places. The others? Well, it is so
much a matter of individual taste. “Tom Cringle’s Log” should have one
for certain. I hope boys respond now as they once did to the sharks and
the pirates, the planters, and all the rollicking high spirits of that
splendid book. Then there is Dana’s “Two Years before the Mast.” I
should find room also for Stevenson’s “Wrecker” and “Ebb Tide.” Clark
Russell deserves a whole shelf for himself, but anyhow you could not
miss out “The Wreck of the _Grosvenor_.” Marryat, of course, must be
represented, and I should pick “Midshipman Easy” and “Peter Simple” as
his samples. Then throw in one of Melville’s Otaheite books—now far too
completely forgotten—“Typee” or “Omoo,” and as a quite modern flavour
Kipling’s “Captains Courageous” and Jack London’s “Sea Wolf,” with
Conrad’s “Nigger of the Narcissus.” Then you will have enough to turn
your study into a cabin and bring the wash and surge to your ears, if
written words can do it. Oh, how one longs for it sometimes when life
grows too artificial, and the old Viking blood begins to stir! Surely
it must linger in all of us, for no man who dwells in an island but had
an ancestor in longship or in coracle. Still more must the salt drop
tingle in the blood of an American when you reflect that in all that
broad continent there is not one whose forefather did not cross 3000
miles of ocean. And yet there are in the Central States millions and
millions of their descendants who have never seen the sea.

I have said that “Omoo” and “Typee,” the books in which the sailor
Melville describes his life among the Otaheitans, have sunk too rapidly
into obscurity. What a charming and interesting task there is for some
critic of catholic tastes and sympathetic judgment to undertake rescue
work among the lost books which would repay salvage! A small volume
setting forth their names and their claims to attention would be
interesting in itself, and more interesting in the material to which it
would serve as an introduction. I am sure there are many good books,
possibly there are some great ones, which have been swept away for a
time in the rush. What chance, for example, has any book by an unknown
author which is published at a moment of great national excitement,
when some public crisis arrests the popular mind? Hundreds have been
still-born in this fashion, and are there none which should have lived
among them? Now, there is a book, a modern one, and written by a youth
under thirty. It is Snaith’s “Broke of Covenden,” and it scarce
attained a second edition. I do not say that it is a Classic—I should
not like to be positive that it is not—but I am perfectly sure that the
man who wrote it has the possibility of a Classic within him. Here is
another novel—“Eight Days,” by Forrest. You can’t buy it. You are lucky
even if you can find it in a library. Yet nothing ever written will
bring the Indian Mutiny home to you as this book will do. Here’s
another which I will warrant you never heard of. It is Powell’s “Animal
Episodes.” No, it is not a collection of dog-and-cat anecdotes, but it
is a series of very singularly told stories which deal with the animal
side of the human, and which you will feel have an entirely new flavour
if you have a discriminating palate. The book came out ten years ago,
and is utterly unknown. If I can point to three in one small shelf, how
many lost lights must be flitting in the outer darkness!

Let me hark back for a moment to the subject with which I began, the
romance of travel and the frequent heroism of modern life. I have two
books of Scientific Exploration here which exhibit both these qualities
as strongly as any I know. I could not choose two better books to put
into a young man’s hands if you wished to train him first in a gentle
and noble firmness of mind, and secondly in a great love for and
interest in all that pertains to Nature. The one is Darwin’s “Journal
of the Voyage of the _Beagle_.” Any discerning eye must have detected
long before the “Origin of Species” appeared, simply on the strength of
this book of travel, that a brain of the first order, united with many
rare qualities of character, had arisen. Never was there a more
comprehensive mind. Nothing was too small and nothing too great for its
alert observation. One page is occupied in the analysis of some
peculiarity in the web of a minute spider, while the next deals with
the evidence for the subsidence of a continent and the extinction of a
myriad animals. And his sweep of knowledge was so great—botany,
geology, zoology, each lending its corroborative aid to the other. How
a youth of Darwin’s age—he was only twenty-three when in the year 1831
he started round the world on the surveying ship _Beagle_—could have
acquired such a mass of information fills one with the same wonder, and
is perhaps of the same nature, as the boy musician who exhibits by
instinct the touch of the master. Another quality which one would be
less disposed to look for in the savant is a fine contempt for danger,
which is veiled in such modesty that one reads between the lines in
order to detect it. When he was in the Argentine, the country outside
the Settlements was covered with roving bands of horse Indians, who
gave no quarter to any whites. Yet Darwin rode the four hundred miles
between Bahia and Buenos Ayres, when even the hardy Gauchos refused to
accompany him. Personal danger and a hideous death were small things to
him compared to a new beetle or an undescribed fly.

The second book to which I alluded is Wallace’s “Malay Archipelago.”
There is a strange similarity in the minds of the two men, the same
courage, both moral and physical, the same gentle persistence, the same
catholic knowledge and wide. sweep of mind, the same passion for the
observation of Nature. Wallace by a flash of intuition understood and
described in a letter to Darwin the cause of the Origin of Species at
the very time when the latter was publishing a book founded upon twenty
years’ labour to prove the same thesis. What must have been his
feelings when he read that letter? And yet he had nothing to fear, for
his book found no more enthusiastic admirer than the man who had in a
sense anticipated it. Here also one sees that Science has its heroes no
less than Religion. One of Wallace’s missions in Papua was to examine
the nature and species of the Birds-of-Paradise; but in the course of
the years of his wanderings through those islands he made a complete
investigation of the whole fauna. A footnote somewhere explains that
the Papuans who lived in the Bird-of-Paradise country were confirmed
cannibals. Fancy living for years with or near such neighbours! Let a
young fellow read these two books, and he cannot fail to have both his
mind and his spirit strengthened by the reading.




XII.


Here we are at the final seance. For the last time, my patient comrade,
I ask you to make yourself comfortable upon the old green settee, to
look up at the oaken shelves, and to bear with me as best you may while
I preach about their contents. The last time! And yet, as I look along
the lines of the volumes, I have not mentioned one out of ten of those
to which I owe a debt of gratitude, nor one in a hundred of the
thoughts which course through my brain as I look at them. As well
perhaps, for the man who has said all that he has to say has invariably
said too much.

Let me be didactic for a moment! I assume this solemn—oh, call it not
pedantic!—attitude because my eye catches the small but select corner
which constitutes my library of Science. I wanted to say that if I were
advising a young man who was beginning life, I should counsel him to
devote one evening a week to scientific reading. Had he the
perseverance to adhere to his resolution, and if he began it at twenty,
he would certainly find himself with an unusually well-furnished mind
at thirty, which would stand him in right good stead in whatever line
of life he might walk. When I advise him to read science, I do not mean
that he should choke himself with the dust of the pedants, and lose
himself in the subdivisions of the Lepidoptera, or the classifications
of the dicotyledonous plants. These dreary details are the prickly
bushes in that enchanted garden, and you are foolish indeed if you
begin your walks by butting your head into one. Keep very clear of them
until you have explored the open beds and wandered down every easy
path. For this reason avoid the text-books, which repel, and cultivate
that popular science which attracts. You cannot hope to be a specialist
upon all these varied subjects. Better far to have a broad idea of
general results, and to understand their relations to each other. A
very little reading will give a man such a knowledge of geology, for
example, as will make every quarry and railway cutting an object of
interest. A very little zoology will enable you to satisfy your
curiosity as to what is the proper name and style of this buff-ermine
moth which at the present instant is buzzing round the lamp. A very
little botany will enable you to recognize every flower you are likely
to meet in your walks abroad, and to give you a tiny thrill of interest
when you chance upon one which is beyond your ken. A very little
archaeology will tell you all about yonder British tumulus, or help you
to fill in the outline of the broken Roman camp upon the downs. A very
little astronomy will cause you to look more intently at the heavens,
to pick out your brothers the planets, who move in your own circles,
from the stranger stars, and to appreciate the order, beauty, and
majesty of that material universe which is most surely the outward sign
of the spiritual force behind it. How a man of science can be a
materialist is as amazing to me as how a sectarian can limit the
possibilities of the Creator. Show me a picture without an artist, show
me a bust without a sculptor, show me music without a musician, and
then you may begin to talk to me of a universe without a
Universe-maker, call Him by what name you will.

Here is Flammarion’s “L’Atmosphere”—a very gorgeous though
weather-stained copy in faded scarlet and gold. The book has a small
history, and I value it. A young Frenchman, dying of fever on the west
coast of Africa, gave it to me as a professional fee. The sight of it
takes me back to a little ship’s bunk, and a sallow face with large,
sad eyes looking out at me. Poor boy, I fear that he never saw his
beloved Marseilles again!

Talking of popular science, I know no better books for exciting a man’s
first interest, and giving a broad general view of the subject, than
these of Samuel Laing. Who would have imagined that the wise savant and
gentle dreamer of these volumes was also the energetic secretary of a
railway company? Many men of the highest scientific eminence have begun
in prosaic lines of life. Herbert Spencer was a railway engineer.
Wallace was a land surveyor. But that a man with so pronounced a
scientific brain as Laing should continue all his life to devote his
time to dull routine work, remaining in harness until extreme old age,
with his soul still open to every fresh idea and his brain acquiring
new concretions of knowledge, is indeed a remarkable fact. Read those
books, and you will be a fuller man.

It is an excellent device to talk about what you have recently read.
Rather hard upon your audience, you may say; but without wishing to be
personal, I dare bet it is more interesting than your usual small talk.
It must, of course, be done with some tact and discretion. It is the
mention of Laing’s works which awoke the train of thought which led to
these remarks. I had met some one at a _table d’hôte_ or elsewhere who
made some remark about the prehistoric remains in the valley of the
Somme. I knew all about those, and showed him that I did. I then threw
out some allusion to the rock temples of Yucatan, which he instantly
picked up and enlarged upon. He spoke of ancient Peruvian civilization,
and I kept well abreast of him. I cited the Titicaca image, and he knew
all about that. He spoke of Quaternary man, and I was with him all the
time. Each was more and more amazed at the fulness and the accuracy of
the information of the other, until like a flash the explanation
crossed my mind. “You are reading Samuel Laing’s ‘Human Origins’!” I
cried. So he was, and so by a coincidence was I. We were pouring water
over each other, but it was all new-drawn from the spring.

There is a big two-volumed book at the end of my science shelf which
would, even now, have its right to be called scientific disputed by
some of the pedants. It is Myers’ “Human Personality.” My own opinion,
for what it is worth, is that it will be recognized a century hence as
a great root book, one from which a whole new branch of science will
have sprung. Where between four covers will you find greater evidence
of patience, of industry, of thought, of discrimination, of that sweep
of mind which can gather up a thousand separate facts and bind them all
in the meshes of a single consistent system? Darwin has not been a more
ardent collector in zoology than Myers in the dim regions of psychic
research, and his whole hypothesis, so new that a new nomenclature and
terminology had to be invented to express it, telepathy, the
subliminal, and the rest of it, will always be a monument of acute
reasoning, expressed in fine prose and founded upon ascertained fact.

The mere suspicion of scientific thought or scientific methods has a
great charm in any branch of literature, however far it may be removed
from actual research. Poe’s tales, for example, owe much to this
effect, though in his case it was a pure illusion. Jules Verne also
produces a charmingly credible effect for the most incredible things by
an adept use of a considerable amount of real knowledge of nature. But
most gracefully of all does it shine in the lighter form of essay,
where playful thoughts draw their analogies and illustrations from
actual fact, each showing up the other, and the combination presenting
a peculiar piquancy to the reader.

Where could I get better illustration of what I mean than in those
three little volumes which make up Wendell Holmes’ immortal series,
“The Autocrat,” “The Poet,” and “The Professor at the Breakfast Table”?
Here the subtle, dainty, delicate thought is continually reinforced by
the allusion or the analogy which shows the wide, accurate knowledge
behind it. What work it is! how wise, how witty, how large-hearted and
tolerant! Could one choose one’s philosopher in the Elysian fields, as
once in Athens, I would surely join the smiling group who listened to
the human, kindly words of the Sage of Boston. I suppose it is just
that continual leaven of science, especially of medical science, which
has from my early student days given those books so strong an
attraction for me. Never have I so known and loved a man whom I had
never seen. It was one of the ambitions of my lifetime to look upon his
face, but by the irony of Fate I arrived in his native city just in
time to lay a wreath upon his newly-turned grave. Read his books again,
and see if you are not especially struck by the up-to-dateness of them.
Like Tennyson’s “In Memoriam,” it seems to me to be work which sprang
into full flower fifty years before its time. One can hardly open a
page haphazard without lighting upon some passage which illustrates the
breadth of view, the felicity of phrase, and the singular power of
playful but most suggestive analogy. Here, for example, is a
paragraph—no better than a dozen others—which combines all the rare
qualities:—

“Insanity is often the logic of an accurate mind overtasked. Good
mental machinery ought to break its own wheels and levers, if anything
is thrust upon them suddenly which tends to stop them or reverse their
motion. A weak mind does not accumulate force enough to hurt itself;
stupidity often saves a man from going mad. We frequently see persons
in insane hospitals, sent there in consequence of what are called
religious mental disturbances. I confess that I think better of them
than of many who hold the same notions, and keep their wits and enjoy
life very well, outside of the asylums. Any decent person ought to go
mad if he really holds such and such opinions…. Anything that is
brutal, cruel, heathenish, that makes life hopeless for the most of
mankind, and perhaps for entire races—anything that assumes the
necessity for the extermination of instincts which were given to be
regulated—no matter by what name you call it—no matter whether a fakir,
or a monk, or a deacon believes it—if received, ought to produce
insanity in every well-regulated mind.”

There’s a fine bit of breezy polemics for the dreary fifties—a fine bit
of moral courage too for the University professor who ventured to say
it.

I put him above Lamb as an essayist, because there is a flavour of
actual knowledge and of practical acquaintance with the problems and
affairs of life, which is lacking in the elfin Londoner. I do not say
that the latter is not the rarer quality. There are my “Essays of
Elia,” and they are well-thumbed as you see, so it is not because I
love Lamb less that I love this other more. Both are exquisite, but
Wendell Holmes is for ever touching some note which awakens an
answering vibration within my own mind.

The essay must always be a somewhat repellent form of literature,
unless it be handled with the lightest and deftest touch. It is too
reminiscent of the school themes of our boyhood—to put a heading and
then to show what you can get under it. Even Stevenson, for whom I have
the most profound admiration, finds it difficult to carry the reader
through a series of such papers, adorned with his original thought and
quaint turn of phrase. Yet his “Men and Books” and “Virginibus
Puerisque” are high examples of what may be done in spite of the
inherent unavoidable difficulty of the task.

But his style! Ah, if Stevenson had only realized how beautiful and
nervous was his own natural God-given style, he would never have been
at pains to acquire another! It is sad to read the much-lauded anecdote
of his imitating this author and that, picking up and dropping, in
search of the best. The best is always the most natural. When Stevenson
becomes a conscious stylist, applauded by so many critics, he seems to
me like a man who, having most natural curls, will still conceal them
under a wig. The moment he is precious he loses his grip. But when he
will abide by his own sterling Lowland Saxon, with the direct word and
the short, cutting sentence, I know not where in recent years we may
find his mate. In this strong, plain setting the occasional happy word
shines like a cut jewel. A really good stylist is like Beau Brummell’s
description of a well-dressed man—so dressed that no one would ever
observe him. The moment you begin to remark a man’s style the odds are
that there is something the matter with it. It is a clouding of the
crystal—a diversion of the reader’s mind from the matter to the manner,
from the author’s subject to the author himself.

No, I have not the Edinburgh edition. If you think of a
presentation—but I should be the last to suggest it. Perhaps on the
whole I would prefer to have him in scattered books, rather than in a
complete set. The half is more than the whole of most authors, and not
the least of him. I am sure that his friends who reverenced his memory
had good warrant and express instructions to publish this complete
edition—very possibly it was arranged before his lamented end. Yet,
speaking generally, I would say that an author was best served by being
very carefully pruned before being exposed to the winds of time. Let
every weak twig, every immature shoot be shorn away, and nothing but
strong, sturdy, well-seasoned branches left. So shall the whole tree
stand strong for years to come. How false an impression of the true
Stevenson would our critical grandchild acquire if he chanced to pick
down any one of half a dozen of these volumes! As we watched his hand
stray down the rank, how we would pray that it might alight upon the
ones we love, on the “New Arabian Nights” “The Ebb-tide,” “The
Wrecker,” “Kidnapped,” or “Treasure Island.” These can surely never
lose their charm.

What noble books of their class are those last, “Kidnapped” and
“Treasure Island”! both, as you see, shining forth upon my lower shelf.
“Treasure Island” is the better story, while I could imagine that
“Kidnapped” might have the more permanent value as being an excellent
and graphic sketch of the state of the Highlands after the last
Jacobite insurrection. Each contains one novel and admirable character,
Alan Breck in the one, and Long John in the other. Surely John Silver,
with his face the size of a ham, and his little gleaming eyes like
crumbs of glass in the centre of it, is the king of all seafaring
desperadoes. Observe how the strong effect is produced in his case:
seldom by direct assertion on the part of the story-teller, but usually
by comparison, innuendo, or indirect reference. The objectionable Billy
Bones is haunted by the dread of “a seafaring man with one leg.”
Captain Flint, we are told, was a brave man; “he was afraid of none,
not he, only Silver—Silver was that genteel.” Or, again, where John
himself says, “there was some that was feared of Pew, and some that was
feared of Flint; but Flint his own self was feared of me. Feared he
was, and proud. They was the roughest crew afloat was Flint’s. The
devil himself would have been feared to go to sea with them. Well, now,
I will tell you. I’m not a boasting man, and you seen yourself how easy
I keep company; but when I was quartermaster, lambs wasn’t the word for
Flint’s old buccaneers.” So, by a touch here and a hint there, there
grows upon us the individuality of the smooth-tongued, ruthless,
masterful, one-legged devil. He is to us not a creation of fiction, but
an organic living reality with whom we have come in contact; such is
the effect of the fine suggestive strokes with which he is drawn. And
the buccaneers themselves, how simple and yet how effective are the
little touches which indicate their ways of thinking and of acting. “I
want to go in that cabin, I do; I want their pickles and wine and
that.” “Now, if you had sailed along o’ Bill you wouldn’t have stood
there to be spoke twice—not you. That was never Bill’s way, not the way
of sich as sailed with him.” Scott’s buccaneers in “The Pirate” are
admirable, but they lack something human which we find here. It will be
long before John Silver loses his place in sea fiction, “and you may
lay to that.”

Stevenson was deeply influenced by Meredith, and even in these books
the influence of the master is apparent. There is the apt use of an
occasional archaic or unusual word, the short, strong descriptions, the
striking metaphors, the somewhat staccato fashion of speech. Yet, in
spite of this flavour, they have quite individuality enough to
constitute a school of their own. Their faults, or rather perhaps their
limitations, lie never in the execution, but entirely in the original
conception. They picture only one side of life, and that a strange and
exceptional one. There is no female interest. We feel that it is an
apotheosis of the boy-story—the penny number of our youth _in
excelsis_. But it is all so good, so fresh, so picturesque, that,
however limited its scope, it still retains a definite and well-assured
place in literature. There is no reason why “Treasure Island” should
not be to the rising generation of the twenty-first century what
“Robinson Crusoe” has been to that of the nineteenth. The balance of
probability is all in that direction.

The modern masculine novel, dealing almost exclusively with the
rougher, more stirring side of life, with the objective rather than the
subjective, marks the reaction against the abuse of love in fiction.
This one phase of life in its orthodox aspect, and ending in the
conventional marriage, has been so hackneyed and worn to a shadow, that
it is not to be wondered at that there is a tendency sometimes to swing
to the other extreme, and to give it less than its fair share in the
affairs of men. In British fiction nine books out of ten have held up
love and marriage as the be-all and end-all of life. Yet we know, in
actual practice, that this may not be so. In the career of the average
man his marriage is an incident, and a momentous incident; but it is
only one of several. He is swayed by many strong emotions—his business,
his ambitions, his friendships, his struggles with the recurrent
dangers and difficulties which tax a man’s wisdom and his courage. Love
will often play a subordinate part in his life. How many go through the
world without ever loving at all? It jars upon us then to have it
continually held up as the predominating, all-important fact in life;
and there is a not unnatural tendency among a certain school, of which
Stevenson is certainly the leader, to avoid altogether a source of
interest which has been so misused and overdone. If all love-making
were like that between Richard Feverel and Lucy Desborough, then indeed
we could not have too much of it; but to be made attractive once more,
the passion must be handled by some great master who has courage to
break down conventionalities and to go straight to actual life for his
inspiration.

The use of novel and piquant forms of speech is one of the most obvious
of Stevenson’s devices. No man handles his adjectives with greater
judgment and nicer discrimination. There is hardly a page of his work
where we do not come across words and expressions which strike us with
a pleasant sense of novelty, and yet express the meaning with admirable
conciseness. “His eyes came coasting round to me.” It is dangerous to
begin quoting, as the examples are interminable, and each suggests
another. Now and then he misses his mark, but it is very seldom. As an
example, an “eye-shot” does not commend itself as a substitute for “a
glance,” and “to tee-hee” for “to giggle” grates somewhat upon the ear,
though the authority of Chaucer might be cited for the expressions.

Next in order is his extraordinary faculty for the use of pithy
similes, which arrest the attention and stimulate the imagination. “His
voice sounded hoarse and awkward, like a rusty lock.” “I saw her sway,
like something stricken by the wind.” “His laugh rang false, like a
cracked bell.” “His voice shook like a taut rope.” “My mind flying like
a weaver’s shuttle.” “His blows resounded on the grave as thick as
sobs.” “The private guilty considerations I would continually observe
to peep forth in the man’s talk like rabbits from a hill.” Nothing
could be more effective than these direct and homely comparisons.

After all, however, the main characteristic of Stevenson is his curious
instinct for saying in the briefest space just those few words which
stamp the impression upon the reader’s mind. He will make you see a
thing more clearly than you would probably have done had your eyes
actually rested upon it. Here are a few of these word-pictures, taken
haphazard from among hundreds of equal merit—

“Not far off Macconochie was standing with his tongue out of his mouth,
and his hand upon his chin, like a dull fellow thinking hard.

“Stewart ran after us for more than a mile, and I could not help
laughing as I looked back at last and saw him on a hill, holding his
hand to his side, and nearly burst with running.

“Ballantrae turned to me with a face all wrinkled up, and his teeth all
showing in his mouth…. He said no word, but his whole appearance was a
kind of dreadful question.

“Look at him, if you doubt; look at him, grinning and gulping, a
detected thief.

“He looked me all over with a warlike eye, and I could see the
challenge on his lips.”

What could be more vivid than the effect produced by such sentences as
these?

There is much more that might be said as to Stevenson’s peculiar and
original methods in fiction. As a minor point, it might be remarked
that he is the inventor of what may be called the mutilated villain. It
is true that Mr. Wilkie Collins has described one gentleman who had not
only been deprived of all his limbs, but was further afflicted by the
insupportable name of Miserrimus Dexter. Stevenson, however, has used
the effect so often, and with such telling results, that he may be said
to have made it his own. To say nothing of Hyde, who was the very
impersonation of deformity, there is the horrid blind Pew, Black Dog
with two fingers missing, Long John with his one leg, and the sinister
catechist who is blind but shoots by ear, and smites about him with his
staff. In “The Black Arrow,” too, there is another dreadful creature
who comes tapping along with a stick. Often as he has used the device,
he handles it so artistically that it never fails to produce its
effect.

Is Stevenson a classic? Well, it is a large word that. You mean by a
classic a piece of work which passes into the permanent literature of
the country. As a rule, you only know your classics when they are in
their graves. Who guessed it of Poe, and who of Borrow? The Roman
Catholics only canonize their saints a century after their death. So
with our classics. The choice lies with our grandchildren. But I can
hardly think that healthy boys will ever let Stevenson’s books of
adventure die, nor do I think that such a short tale as “The Pavilion
on the Links” nor so magnificent a parable as “Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde”
will ever cease to be esteemed. How well I remember the eagerness, the
delight with which I read those early tales in “Cornhill” away back in
the late seventies and early eighties. They were unsigned, after the
old unfair fashion, but no man with any sense of prose could fail to
know that they were all by the same author. Only years afterwards did I
learn who that author was.

I have Stevenson’s collected poems over yonder in the small cabinet.
Would that he had given us more! Most of them are the merest playful
sallies of a freakish mind. But one should, indeed, be a classic, for
it is in my judgment by all odds the best narrative ballad of the last
century—that is if I am right in supposing that “The Ancient Mariner”
appeared at the very end of the eighteenth. I would put Coleridge’s
tour de force of grim fancy first, but I know none other to compare in
glamour and phrase and easy power with “Ticonderoga.” Then there is his
immortal epitaph. The two pieces alone give him a niche of his own in
our poetical literature, just as his character gives him a niche of his
own in our affections. No, I never met him. But among my most prized
possessions are several letters which I received from Samoa. From that
distant tower he kept a surprisingly close watch upon what was doing
among the bookmen, and it was his hand which was among the first held
out to the striver, for he had quick appreciation and keen sympathies
which met another man’s work half-way, and wove into it a beauty from
his own mind.

And now, my very patient friend, the time has come for us to part, and
I hope my little sermons have not bored you over-much. If I have put
you on the track of anything which you did not know before, then verify
it and pass it on. If I have not, there is no harm done, save that my
breath and your time have been wasted. There may be a score of mistakes
in what I have said—is it not the privilege of the conversationalist to
misquote? My judgments may differ very far from yours, and my likings
may be your abhorrence; but the mere thinking and talking of books is
in itself good, be the upshot what it may. For the time the magic door
is still shut. You are still in the land of faerie. But, alas, though
you shut that door, you cannot seal it. Still come the ring of bell,
the call of telephone, the summons back to the sordid world of work and
men and daily strife. Well, that’s the real life after all—this only
the imitation. And yet, now that the portal is wide open and we stride
out together, do we not face our fate with a braver heart for all the
rest and quiet and comradeship that we found behind the Magic Door?


THE TRAGEDY OF THE KOROSKO

SIR ARTHUR CONAN DOYLE.




CHAPTER I.


The public may possibly wonder why it is that they have never heard in
the papers of the fate of the passengers of the _Korosko_. In these
days of universal press agencies, responsive to the slightest stimulus,
it may well seem incredible that an international incident of such
importance should remain so long unchronicled. Suffice it that there
were very valid reasons, both of a personal and of a political nature,
for holding it back. The facts were well known to a good number of
people at the time, and some version of them did actually appear in a
provincial paper, but was generally discredited. They have now been
thrown into narrative form, the incidents having been collated from the
sworn statements of Colonel Cochrane Cochrane, of the Army and Navy
Club, and from the letters of Miss Adams, of Boston, Mass.

These have been supplemented by the evidence of Captain Archer, of the
Egyptian Camel Corps, as given before the secret Government inquiry at
Cairo. Mr. James Stephens has refused to put his version of the matter
into writing, but as these proofs have been submitted to him, and no
correction or deletion has been made in them, it may be supposed that he
has not succeeded in detecting any grave misstatement of fact, and that
any objection which he may have to their publication depends rather upon
private and personal scruples.

The _Korosko_, a turtle-bottomed, round-bowed stern-wheeler, with a
30-inch draught and the lines of a flat-iron, started upon the 13th of
February in the year 1895, from Shellal, at the head of the first
cataract, bound for Wady Halfa. I have a passenger card for the trip,
which I here reproduce:

           S.W. “KOROSKO,” FEBRUARY 13TH.
                 PASSENGERS.

      Colonel Cochrane Cochrane        London.
      Mr. Cecil Brown                  London.
      John H. Headingly                Boston, U.S.A.
      Miss Adams                       Boston, U.S.A.
      Miss S. Adams                    Worcester, Mass., U.S.A.
      Mons. Fardet                     Paris.
      Mr. and Mrs. Belmont             Dublin.
      James Stephens                   Manchester.
      Rev. John Stuart                 Birmingham.
      Mrs. Shlesinger, nurse and child Florence.

This was the party as it started from Shellal, with the intention of
travelling up the two hundred miles of Nubian Nile which lie between the
first and the second cataract.

It is a singular country, this Nubia. Varying in breadth from a few
miles to as many yards (for the name is only applied to the narrow
portion which is capable of cultivation), it extends in a thin, green,
palm-fringed strip upon either side of the broad coffee-coloured river.
Beyond it there stretches on the Libyan bank a savage and illimitable
desert, extending to the whole breadth of Africa. On the other side an
equally desolate wilderness is bounded only by the distant Red Sea.
Between these two huge and barren expanses Nubia writhes like a green
sandworm along the course of the river. Here and there it disappears
altogether, and the Nile runs between black and sun-cracked hills, with
the orange drift-sand lying like glaciers in their valleys. Everywhere
one sees traces of vanished races and submerged civilisations.
Grotesque graves dot the hills or stand up against the sky-line:
pyramidal graves, tumulus graves, rock graves--everywhere, graves.
And, occasionally, as the boat rounds a rocky point, one sees a deserted
city up above--houses, walls, battlements, with the sun shining through
the empty window squares. Sometimes you learn that it has been Roman,
sometimes Egyptian, sometimes all record of its name or origin has been
absolutely lost. You ask yourself in amazement why any race should
build in so uncouth a solitude, and you find it difficult to accept the
theory that this has only been of value as a guard-house to the richer
country down below, and that these frequent cities have been so many
fortresses to hold off the wild and predatory men of the south.
But whatever be their explanation, be it a fierce neighbour, or be it a
climatic change, there they stand, these grim and silent cities, and up
on the hills you can see the graves of their people, like the port-holes
of a man-of-war. It is through this weird, dead country that the
tourists smoke and gossip and flirt as they pass up to the Egyptian
frontier.

The passengers of the _Korosko_ formed a merry party, for most of them
had travelled up together from Cairo to Assouan, and even Anglo-Saxon
ice thaws rapidly upon the Nile. They were fortunate in being without
the single disagreeable person who, in these small boats, is sufficient
to mar the enjoyment of the whole party. On a vessel which is little
more than a large steam launch, the bore, the cynic, or the grumbler
holds the company at his mercy. But the _Korosko_ was free from
anything of the kind. Colonel Cochrane Cochrane was one of those
officers whom the British Government, acting upon a large system of
averages, declares at a certain age to be incapable of further service,
and who demonstrate the worth of such a system by spending their
declining years in exploring Morocco, or shooting lions in Somaliland.
He was a dark, straight, aquiline man, with a courteously deferential
manner, but a steady, questioning eye; very neat in his dress and
precise in his habits, a gentleman to the tips of his trim finger-nails.
In his Anglo-Saxon dislike to effusiveness he had cultivated a
self-contained manner which was apt at first acquaintance to be
repellent, and he seemed to those who really knew him to be at some
pains to conceal the kind heart and human emotions which influenced his
actions. It was respect rather than affection which he inspired among
his fellow-travellers, for they felt, like all who had ever met him,
that he was a man with whom acquaintance was unlikely to ripen into a
friendship, though a friendship, when once attained, would be an
unchanging and inseparable part of himself. He wore a grizzled military
moustache, but his hair was singularly black for a man of his years.
He made no allusion in his conversation to the numerous campaigns in
which he had distinguished himself, and the reason usually given for his
reticence was that they dated back to such early Victorian days that he
had to sacrifice his military glory at the shrine of his perennial
youth.

Mr. Cecil Brown--to take the names in the chance order in which they
appear upon the passenger list--was a young diplomatist from a
Continental Embassy, a man slightly tainted with the Oxford manner, and
erring upon the side of unnatural and inhuman refinement, but full of
interesting talk and cultured thought. He had a sad, handsome face, a
small wax-tipped moustache, a low voice and a listless manner, which was
relieved by a charming habit of suddenly lighting up into a rapid smile
and gleam when anything caught his fancy. An acquired cynicism was
eternally crushing and overlying his natural youthful enthusiasms, and
he ignored what was obvious while expressing keen appreciation for what
seemed to the average man to be either trivial or unhealthy. He chose
Walter Pater for his travelling author, and sat all day, reserved but
affable, under the awning, with his novel and his sketch-book upon a
camp-stool beside him. His personal dignity prevented him from making
advances to others, but if they chose to address him they found a
courteous and amiable companion.

The Americans formed a group by themselves. John H. Headingly was a
New Englander, a graduate of Harvard, who was completing his education
by a tour round the world. He stood for the best type of young
American--quick, observant, serious, eager for knowledge and fairly
free from prejudice, with a fine balance of unsectarian but earnest
religious feeling which held him steady amid all the sudden gusts of
youth. He had less of the appearance and more of the reality of culture
than the young Oxford diplomatist, for he had keener emotions though
less exact knowledge. Miss Adams and Miss Sadie Adams were aunt and
niece, the former a little, energetic, hard-featured Bostonian old-maid,
with a huge surplus of unused love behind her stern and swarthy
features. She had never been from home before, and she was now busy
upon the self-imposed task of bringing the East up to the standard of
Massachusetts. She had hardly landed in Egypt before she realised that
the country needed putting to rights, and since the conviction struck
her she had been very fully occupied. The saddle-galled donkeys, the
starved pariah dogs, the flies round the eyes of the babies, the naked
children, the importunate beggars, the ragged, untidy women--they were
all challenges to her conscience, and she plunged in bravely at her work
of reformation. As she could not speak a word of the language, however,
and was unable to make any of the delinquents understand what it was
that she wanted, her passage up the Nile left the immemorial East very
much as she had found it, but afforded a good deal of sympathetic
amusement to her fellow-travellers. No one enjoyed her efforts more
than her niece, Sadie, who shared with Mrs. Belmont the distinction of
being the most popular person upon the boat. She was very young--fresh
from Smith College--and she still possessed many both of the virtues and
of the faults of a child. She had the frankness, the trusting
confidence, the innocent straightforwardness, the high spirits, and also
the loquacity and the want of reverence. But even her faults caused
amusement, and if she had preserved many of the characteristics of a
clever child, she was none the less a tall and handsome woman, who
looked older than her years on account of that low curve of the hair
over the ears, and that fullness of bodice and skirt which Mr. Gibson
has either initiated or imitated. The whisk of those skirts, and the
frank, incisive voice and pleasant, catching laugh were familiar and
welcome sounds on board of the _Korosko_. Even the rigid Colonel
softened into geniality, and the Oxford-bred diplomatist forgot to be
unnatural with Miss Sadie Adams as a companion.

The other passengers may be dismissed more briefly. Some were
interesting, some neutral, and all amiable. Monsieur Fardet was a
good-natured but argumentative Frenchman, who held the most decided
views as to the deep machinations of Great Britain, and the illegality
of her position in Egypt. Mr. Belmont was an iron-grey, sturdy
Irishman, famous as an astonishingly good long-range rifle-shot, who had
carried off nearly every prize which Wimbledon or Bisley had to offer.
With him was his wife, a very charming and refined woman, full of the
pleasant playfulness of her country. Mrs. Shlesinger was a middle-aged
widow, quiet and soothing, with her thoughts all taken up by her
six-year-old child, as a mother’s thoughts are likely to be in a boat
which has an open rail for a bulwark. The Reverend John Stuart was a
Nonconformist minister from Birmingham--either a Presbyterian or a
Congregationalist--a man of immense stoutness, slow and torpid in his
ways, but blessed with a considerable fund of homely humour, which made
him, I am told, a very favourite preacher, and an effective speaker from
advanced Radical platforms.

Finally, there was Mr. James Stephens, a Manchester solicitor (junior
partner of Hickson, Ward, and Stephens), who was travelling to shake off
the effects of an attack of influenza. Stephens was a man who, in the
course of thirty years, had worked himself up from cleaning the firm’s
windows to managing its business. For most of that long time he had
been absolutely immersed in dry, technical work, living with the one
idea of satisfying old clients and attracting new ones, until his mind
and soul had become as formal and precise as the laws which he
expounded. A fine and sensitive nature was in danger of being as warped
as a busy city man’s is liable to become. His work had become an
engrained habit, and, being a bachelor, he had hardly an interest in
life to draw him away from it, so that his soul was being gradually
bricked up like the body of a mediaeval nun. But at last there came
this kindly illness, and Nature hustled James Stephens out of his
groove, and sent him into the broad world far away from roaring
Manchester and his shelves full of calf-skin authorities. At first he
resented it deeply. Everything seemed trivial to him compared to his
own petty routine. But gradually his eyes were opened, and he began
dimly to see that it was his work which was trivial when compared to
this wonderful, varied, inexplicable world of which he was so ignorant.
Vaguely he realised that the interruption to his career might be more
important than the career itself. All sorts of new interests took
possession of him; and the middle-aged lawyer developed an after-glow of
that youth which had been wasted among his books. His character was
too formed to admit of his being anything but dry and precise in his
ways, and a trifle pedantic in his mode of speech; but he read and
thought and observed, scoring his “Baedeker” with underlinings and
annotations as he had once done his “Prideaux’s Commentaries.” He had
travelled up from Cairo with the party, and had contracted a friendship
with Miss Adams and her niece. The young American girl, with her
chatter, her audacity, and her constant flow of high spirits, amused and
interested him, and she in turn felt a mixture of respect and of pity
for his knowledge and his limitations. So they became good friends, and
people smiled to see his clouded face and her sunny one bending over the
same guide-book.

The little _Korosko_ puffed and spluttered her way up the river, kicking
up the white water behind her, and making more noise and fuss over her
five knots an hour than an Atlantic liner on a record voyage. On deck,
under the thick awning, sat her little family of passengers, and every
few hours she eased down and sidled up to the bank to allow them to
visit one more of that innumerable succession of temples. The remains,
however, grow more modern as one ascends from Cairo, and travellers who
have sated themselves at Gizeh and Sakara with the contemplation of the
very oldest buildings which the hands of man have constructed, become
impatient of temples which are hardly older than the Christian era.
Ruins which would be gazed upon with wonder and veneration in any other
country are hardly noticed in Egypt. The tourists viewed with languid
interest the half-Greek art of the Nubian bas-reliefs; they climbed the
hill of Korosko to see the sun rise over the savage Eastern desert; they
were moved to wonder by the great shrine of Abou-Simbel, where some old
race has hollowed out a mountain as if it were a cheese; and, finally,
upon the evening of the fourth day of their travels they arrived at Wady
Halfa, the frontier garrison town, some few hours after they were due,
on account of a small mishap in the engine-room. The next morning was
to be devoted to an expedition to the famous rock of Abousir, from which
a great view may be obtained of the second cataract. At eight-thirty,
as the passengers sat on deck after dinner, Mansoor, the dragoman, half
Copt, half Syrian, came forward, according to the nightly custom, to
announce the programme for the morrow.

“Ladies and gentlemen,” said he, plunging boldly into the rapid but
broken stream of his English, “to-morrow you will remember not to forget
to rise when the gong strikes you for to compress the journey before
twelve o’clock. Having arrived at the place where the donkeys expect
us, we shall ride five miles over the desert, passing a temple of
Ammon-ra, which dates itself from the eighteenth dynasty, upon the way,
and so reach the celebrated pulpit rock of Abousir. The pulpit rock is
supposed to have been called so, because it is a rock like a pulpit.
When you have reached it you will know that you are on the very edge of
civilisation, and that very little more will take you into the country
of the Dervishes, which will be obvious to you at the top.
Having passed the summit, you will perceive the full extremity of the
second cataract, embracing wild natural beauties of the most dreadful
variety. Here all very famous people carve their names--and so you will
carve your names also.” Mansoor waited expectantly for a titter, and
bowed to it when it arrived. “You will then return to Wady Halfa, and
there remain two hours to suspect the Camel Corps, including the
grooming of the beasts, and the bazaar before returning, so I wish you a
very happy good-night.”

There was a gleam of his white teeth in the lamplight, and then his
long, dark petticoats, his short English cover-coat, and his red
tarboosh vanished successively down the ladder. The low buzz of
conversation which had been suspended by his coming broke out anew.

“I’m relying on you, Mr. Stephens, to tell me all about Abousir,” said
Miss Sadie Adams. “I do like to know what I am looking at right there
at the time, and not six hours afterwards in my state-room. I haven’t
got Abou-Simbel and the wall pictures straight in my mind yet, though I
saw them yesterday.”

“I never hope to keep up with it,” said her aunt. “When I am safe back
in Commonwealth Avenue, and there’s no dragoman to hustle me around,
I’ll have time to read about it all, and then I expect I shall begin to
enthuse, and want to come right back again. But it’s just too good of
you, Mr. Stephens, to try and keep us informed.”

“I thought that you might wish precise information, and so I prepared a
small digest of the matter,” said Stephens, handing a slip of paper to
Miss Sadie. She looked at it in the light of the deck lamp, and broke
into her low, hearty laugh.

“_Re_ Abousir,” she read; “now, what _do_ you mean by ‘_re_,’ Mr.
Stephens? You put ‘_re_ Rameses the Second’ on the last paper you gave
me.”

“It is a habit I have acquired, Miss Sadie,” said Stephens; “it is the
custom in the legal profession when they make a memo.”

“Make what, Mr. Stephens?”

“A memo--a memorandum, you know. We put _re_ so-and-so to show what it
is about.”

“I suppose it’s a good short way,” said Miss Sadie, “but it feels queer
somehow when applied to scenery or to dead Egyptian kings.
‘_Re_ Cheops’--doesn’t that strike you as funny?”

“No, I can’t say that it does,” said Stephens.

“I wonder if it is true that the English have less humour than the
Americans, or whether it’s just another kind of humour,” said the girl.
She had a quiet, abstracted way of talking as if she were thinking
aloud. “I used to imagine they had less, and yet, when you come to
think of it, Dickens and Thackeray and Barrie, and so many other of the
humourists we admire most are Britishers. Besides, I never in all my
days heard people laugh so hard as in that London theatre. There was a
man behind us, and every time he laughed Auntie looked round to see if a
door had opened, he made such a draught. But you have some funny
expressions, Mr. Stephens!”

“What else strikes you as funny, Miss Sadie?”

“Well, when you sent me the temple ticket and the little map, you began
your letter, ‘Enclosed, please find,’ and then at the bottom, in
brackets, you had ‘2 enclo.’”

“That is the usual form in business.”

“Yes, in business,” said Sadie demurely, and there was a silence.

“There’s one thing I wish,” remarked Miss Adams, in the hard, metallic
voice with which she disguised her softness of heart, “and that is, that
I could see the Legislature of this country and lay a few cold-drawn
facts in front of them. I’d make a platform of my own, Mr. Stephens,
and run a party on my ticket. A Bill for the compulsory use of eyewash
would be one of my planks, and another would be for the abolition of
those Yashmak veil things which turn a woman into a bale of cotton goods
with a pair of eyes looking out of it.”

“I never could think why they wore them,” said Sadie; “until one day I
saw one with her veil lifted. Then I knew.”

“They make me tired, those women,” cried Miss Adams wrathfully.
“One might as well try to preach duty and decency and cleanliness to a
line of bolsters. Why, good land, it was only yesterday at Abou-Simbel,
Mr. Stephens, I was passing one of their houses--if you can call a
mud-pie like that a house--and I saw two of the children at the door
with the usual crust of flies round their eyes, and great holes in their
poor little blue gowns! So I got off my donkey, and I turned up my
sleeves, and I washed their faces well with my handkerchief, and sewed
up the rents--for in this country I would as soon think of going ashore
without my needle-case as without my white umbrella, Mr. Stephens.
Then as I warmed on the job I got into the room--such a room!--and I
packed the folks out of it, and I fairly did the chores as if I had been
the hired help. I’ve seen no more of that temple of Abou-Simbel than if
I had never left Boston; but, my sakes, I saw more dust and mess than
you would think they could crowd into a house the size of a Newport
bathing-hut. From the time I pinned up my skirt until I came out with
my face the colour of that smoke-stack, wasn’t more than an hour, or
maybe an hour and a half, but I had that house as clean and fresh as a
new pine-wood box. I had a _New York Herald_ with me, and I lined their
shelf with paper for them. Well, Mr. Stephens, when I had done washing
my hands outside, I came past the door again, and there were those two
children sitting on the stoop with their eyes full of flies, and all
just the same as ever, except that each had a little paper cap made out
of the _New York Herald_ upon his head. But, say, Sadie, it’s going on
to ten o’clock, and to-morrow an early excursion.”

“It’s just too beautiful, this purple sky and the great silver stars,”
said Sadie. “Look at the silent desert and the black shadows of the
hills. It’s grand, but it’s terrible too; and then when you think that
we really _are_, as that dragoman said just now, on the very end of
civilisation, and with nothing but savagery and bloodshed down there
where the Southern Cross is twinkling so prettily, why, it’s like
standing on the beautiful edge of a live volcano.”

“Shucks, Sadie, don’t talk like that, child,” said the older woman
nervously. “It’s enough to scare any one to listen to you.”

“Well, but don’t you feel it yourself, Auntie? Look at that great
desert stretching away and away until it is lost in the shadows.
Hear the sad whisper of the wind across it! It’s just the most solemn
thing that ever I saw in my life.”

“I’m glad we’ve found something that will make you solemn, my dear,”
said her Aunt. “I’ve sometimes thought--Sakes alive, what’s that?”

From somewhere amongst the hill shadows upon the other side of the river
there had risen a high shrill whimpering, rising and swelling, to end in
a long weary wail.

“It’s only a jackal, Miss Adams,” said Stephens. “I heard one when we
went out to see the Sphinx by moonlight.”

But the American lady had risen, and her face showed that her nerves had
been ruffled.

“If I had my time over again I wouldn’t have come past Assouan,” said
she. “I can’t think what possessed me to bring you all the way up here,
Sadie. Your mother will think that I am clean crazy, and I’d never dare
to look her in the eye if anything went wrong with us. I’ve seen all I
want to see of this river, and all I ask now is to be back at Cairo
again.”

“Why, Auntie,” cried the girl, “it isn’t like you to be faint-hearted.”

“Well, I don’t know how it is, Sadie, but I feel a bit unstrung, and
that beast caterwauling over yonder was just more than I could put up
with. There’s one consolation, we are scheduled to be on our way home
to-morrow, after we’ve seen this one rock or temple, or whatever it is.
I’m full up of rocks and temples, Mr. Stephens. I shouldn’t mope if I
never saw another. Come, Sadie! Good-night!”

“Good-night! Good-night, Miss Adams!”

And the two ladies passed down to their cabins.

Monsieur Fardet was chatting, in a subdued voice, with Headingly, the
young Harvard graduate, bending forward confidentially between the
whiffs of his cigarette.

“Dervishes, Mister Headingly!” said he, speaking excellent English, but
separating his syllables as a Frenchman will. “There are no Dervishes.
They do not exist.”

“Why, I thought the woods were full of them,” said the American.

Monsieur Fardet glanced across to where the red core of Colonel
Cochrane’s cigar was glowing through the darkness.

“You are an American, and you do not like the English,” he whispered.
“It is perfectly comprehended upon the Continent that the Americans are
opposed to the English.”

“Well,” said Headingly, with his slow, deliberate manner, “I won’t say
that we have not our tiffs, and there are some of our people--mostly of
Irish stock--who are always mad with England; but the most of us have a
kindly thought for the mother country. You see they may be aggravating
folk sometimes, but after all they are our _own_ folk, and we can’t wipe
that off the slate.”

“_Eh bien!_” said the Frenchman. “At least I can say to you what I
could not without offence say to these others. And I repeat that there
_are_ no Dervishes. They were an invention of Lord Cromer in the year
1885.”

“You don’t say!” cried Headingly.

“It is well known in Paris, and has been exposed in _La Patrie_ and
other of our so well-informed papers.”

“But this is colossal,” said Headingly. “Do you mean to tell me,
Monsieur Fardet, that the siege of Khartoum and the death of Gordon and
the rest of it was just one great bluff?”

“I will not deny that there was an émeute, but it was local, you
understand, and now long forgotten. Since then there has been profound
peace in the Soudan.”

“But I have heard of raids, Monsieur Fardet, and I’ve read of battles,
too, when the Arabs tried to invade Egypt. It was only two days ago
that we passed Toski, where the dragoman said there had been a fight.
Is that all bluff also?”

“Pah, my friend, you do not know the English. You look at them as you
see them with their pipes and their contented faces, and you say, ‘Now,
these are good, simple folk, who will never hurt any one.’ But all the
time they are thinking and watching and planning. ‘Here is Egypt weak,’
they cry. ‘_Allons!_’ and down they swoop like a gull upon a crust.
‘You have no right there,’ says the world. ‘Come out of it!’
But England has already begun to tidy everything, just like the good
Miss Adams when she forces her way into the house of an Arab.
‘Come out,’ says the world. ‘Certainly,’ says England; ‘just wait one
little minute until I have made everything nice and proper.’ So the
world waits for a year or so, and then it says once again, ‘Come out.’
‘Just wait a little,’ says England; ‘there is trouble at Khartoum, and
when I have set that all right I shall be very glad to come out.’
So they wait until it is all over, and then again they say, ‘Come out.’
‘How can I come out,’ says England, ‘when there are still raids and
battles going on? If we were to leave, Egypt would be run over.’
‘But there are no raids,’ says the world. ‘Oh, are there not?’ says
England, and then within a week sure enough the papers are full of some
new raid of Dervishes. We are not all blind, Mister Headingly.
We understand very well how such things can be done. A few Bedouins, a
little backsheesh, some blank cartridges, and, behold--a raid!”

“Well, well,” said the American, “I’m glad to know the rights of this
business, for it has often puzzled me. But what does England get out of
it?”

“She gets the country, monsieur.”

“I see. You mean, for example, that there is a favourable tariff for
British goods?”

“No, monsieur; it is the same for all.”

“Well, then, she gives the contracts to Britishers?”

“Precisely, monsieur.”

“For example, the railroad that they are building right through the
country, the one that runs alongside the river, that would be a valuable
contract for the British?”

Monsieur Fardet was an honest man, if an imaginative one.

“It is a French company, monsieur, which holds the railway contract,”
said he.

The American was puzzled.

“They don’t seem to get much for their trouble,” said he. “Still, of
course, there must be some indirect pull somewhere. For example, Egypt
no doubt has to pay and keep all those red-coats in Cairo.”

“Egypt, monsieur! No, they are paid by England.”

“Well, I suppose they know their own business best, but they seem to me
to take a great deal of trouble, and to get mighty little in exchange.
If they don’t mind keeping order and guarding the frontier, with a
constant war against the Dervishes on their hands, I don’t know why any
one should object. I suppose no one denies that the prosperity of the
country has increased enormously since they came. The revenue returns
show that. They tell me also that the poorer folks have justice, which
they never had before.”

“What are they doing here at all?” cried the Frenchman angrily.
“Let them go back to their island. We cannot have them all over the
world.”

“Well, certainly, to us Americans, who live all in our own land, it does
seem strange how you European nations are for ever slopping over into
some other country which was not meant for you. It’s easy for us to
talk, of course, for we have still got room and to spare for all our
people. When we begin pushing each other over the edge we shall have to
start annexing also. But at present just here in North Africa there is
Italy in Abyssinia, and England in Egypt, and France in Algiers--”

“France!” cried Monsieur Fardet. “Algiers belongs to France.
You laugh, monsieur. I have the honour to wish you a very good-night.”
He rose from his seat, and walked off, rigid with outraged patriotism,
to his cabin.




CHAPTER II.


The young American hesitated for a little, debating in his mind whether
he should not go down and post up the daily record of his impressions
which he kept for his home-staying sister. But the cigars of Colonel
Cochrane and of Cecil Brown were still twinkling in the far corner of
the deck, and the student was acquisitive in the search of information.
He did not quite know how to lead up to the matter, but the Colonel very
soon did it for him.

“Come on, Headingly,” said he, pushing a camp-stool in his direction.
“This is the place for an antidote. I see that Fardet has been pouring
politics into your ear.”

“I can always recognise the confidential stoop of his shoulders when he
discusses _la haute politique_,” said the dandy diplomatist. “But what
a sacrilege upon a night like this! What a nocturne in blue and silver
might be suggested by that moon rising above the desert. There is a
movement in one of Mendelssohn’s songs which seems to embody it all--
a sense of vastness, of repetition, the cry of the wind over an
interminable expanse. The subtler emotions which cannot be translated
into words are still to be hinted at by chords and harmonies.”

“It seems wilder and more savage than ever to-night,” remarked the
American. “It gives me the same feeling of pitiless force that the
Atlantic does upon a cold, dark, winter day. Perhaps it is the
knowledge that we are right there on the very edge of any kind of law
and order. How far do you suppose that we are from any Dervishes,
Colonel Cochrane?”

“Well, on the Arabian side,” said the Colonel, “we have the Egyptian
fortified camp of Sarras about forty miles to the south of us. Beyond
that are sixty miles of very wild country before you would come to the
Dervish post at Akasheh. On this other side, however, there is nothing
between us and them.”

“Abousir is on this side, is it not?”

“Yes. That is why the excursion to the Abousir Rock has been forbidden
for the last year. But things are quieter now.”

“What is to prevent them from coming down on that side?”

“Absolutely nothing,” said Cecil Brown, in his listless voice.

“Nothing, except their fears. The coming of course would be perfectly
simple. The difficulty would lie in the return. They might find it
hard to get back if their camels were spent, and the Halfa garrison with
their beasts fresh got on their track. They know it as well as we do,
and it has kept them from trying.”

“It isn’t safe to reckon upon a Dervish’s fears,” remarked Brown.
“We must always bear in mind that they are not amenable to the same
motives as other people. Many of them are anxious to meet death, and
all of them are absolute, uncompromising believers in destiny.
They exist as a _reductio ad absurdum_ of all bigotry--a proof of how
surely it leads towards blank barbarism.”

“You think these people are a real menace to Egypt?” asked the American.
“There seems from what I have heard to be some difference of opinion
about it. Monsieur Fardet, for example, does not seem to think that the
danger is a very pressing one.”

“I am not a rich man,” Colonel Cochrane answered after a little pause,
“but I am prepared to lay all I am worth, that within three years of the
British officers being withdrawn, the Dervishes would be upon the
Mediterranean. Where would the civilisation of Egypt be? Where would
the hundreds of millions which have been invested in this country?
Where the monuments which all nations look upon as most precious
memorials of the past?”

“Come now, Colonel,” cried Headingly, laughing, “surely you don’t mean
that they would shift the pyramids?”

“You cannot foretell what they would do. There is no iconoclast in the
world like an extreme Mohammedan. Last time they overran this country
they burned the Alexandrian Library. You know that all representations
of the human features are against the letter of the Koran. A statue is
always an irreligious object in their eyes. What do these fellows care
for the sentiment of Europe? The more they could offend it, the more
delighted they would be. Down would go the Sphinx, the Colossi, the
Statues of Abou-Simbel--as the saints went down in England before
Cromwell’s troopers.”

“Well now,” said Headingly, in his slow, thoughtful fashion, “suppose I
grant you that the Dervishes could overrun Egypt, and suppose also that
you English are holding them out, what I’m never done asking is, what
reason have you for spending all these millions of dollars and the lives
of so many of your men? What do you get out of it, more than France
gets, or Germany, or any other country, that runs no risk and never lays
out a cent?”

“There are a good many Englishmen who are asking themselves that
question,” remarked Cecil Brown. “It’s my opinion that we have been the
policemen of the world long enough. We policed the seas for pirates and
slavers. Now we police the land for Dervishes and brigands and every
sort of danger to civilisation. There is never a mad priest or a witch
doctor, or a firebrand of any sort on this planet, who does not report
his appearance by sniping the nearest British officer. One tires of it
at last. If a Kurd breaks loose in Asia Minor, the world wants to know
why Great Britain does not keep him in order. If there is a military
mutiny in Egypt, or a Jehad in the Soudan, it is still Great Britain who
has to set it right. And all to an accompaniment of curses such as the
policeman gets when he seizes a ruffian among his pals. We get hard
knocks and no thanks, and why should we do it? Let Europe do its own
dirty work.”

“Well,” said Colonel Cochrane, crossing his legs and leaning forward
with the decision of a man who has definite opinions, “I don’t at all
agree with you, Brown, and I think that to advocate such a course is to
take a very limited view of our national duties. I think that behind
national interests and diplomacy and all that there lies a great guiding
force--a Providence, in fact--which is for ever getting the best out of
each nation and using it for the good of the whole. When a nation
ceases to respond, it is time that she went into hospital for a few
centuries, like Spain or Greece--the virtue has gone out of her. A man
or a nation is not placed upon this earth to do merely what is pleasant
and what is profitable. It is often called upon to carry out what is
both unpleasant and unprofitable, but if it is obviously right it is
mere shirking not to undertake it.”

Headingly nodded approvingly.

“Each has its own mission. Germany is predominant in abstract thought;
France in literature, art, and grace. But we and you--for the
English-speakers are all in the same boat, however much the _New York
Sun_ may scream over it--we and you have among our best men a higher
conception of moral sense and public duty than is to be found in any
other people. Now, these are the two qualities which are needed for
directing a weaker race. You can’t help them by abstract thought or by
graceful art, but only by that moral sense which will hold the scales of
Justice even, and keep itself free from every taint of corruption.
That is how we rule India. We came there by a kind of natural law, like
air rushing into a vacuum. All over the world, against our direct
interests and our deliberate intentions, we are drawn into the same
thing. And it will happen to you also. The pressure of destiny will
force you to administer the Whole of America from Mexico to the Horn.”

Headingly whistled.

“Our Jingoes would be pleased to hear you, Colonel Cochrane,” said he.
“They’d vote you into our Senate and make you one of the Committee on
Foreign Relations.”

“The world is small, and it grows smaller every day. It’s a single
organic body, and one spot of gangrene is enough to vitiate the whole.
There’s no room upon it for dishonest, defaulting, tyrannical,
irresponsible Governments. As long as they exist they will always be
sources of trouble and of danger. But there are many races which appear
to be so incapable of improvement that we can never hope to get a good
Government out of them. What is to be done, then? The former device of
Providence in such a case was extermination by some more virile stock--
an Attila or a Tamerlane pruned off the weaker branch. Now, we have a
more merciful substitution of rulers, or even of mere advice from a more
advanced race. That is the case with the Central Asian Khanates and
with the protected States of India. If the work has to be done, and if
we are the best fitted for the work, then I think that it would be a
cowardice and a crime to shirk it.”

“But who is to decide whether it is a fitting case for your
interference?” objected the American. “A predatory country could grab
every other land in the world upon such a pretext.”

“Events--inexorable, inevitable events--will decide it. Take this
Egyptian business as an example. In 1881 there was nothing in this
world further from the minds of our people than any interference with
Egypt; and yet 1882 left us in possession of the country. There was
never any choice in the chain of events. A massacre in the streets of
Alexandria, and the mounting of guns to drive out our fleet--which was
there, you understand, in fulfilment of solemn treaty obligations--led
to the bombardment. The bombardment led to a landing to save the city
from destruction. The landing caused an extension of operations--and
here we are, with the country upon our hands. At the time of trouble we
begged and implored the French, or any one else, to come and help us to
put the thing to rights, but they all deserted us when there was work to
be done, although they are ready enough to scold and to impede us now.
When we tried to get out of it, up came this wild Dervish movement, and
we had to sit tighter than ever. We never wanted the task; but, now
that it has come, we must put it through in a workmanlike manner.
We’ve brought justice into the country, and purity of administration,
and protection for the poor man. It has made more advance in the last
twelve years than since the Moslem invasion in the seventh century.
Except the pay of a couple of hundred men, who spend their money in the
country, England has neither directly nor indirectly made a shilling out
of it, and I don’t believe you will find in history a more successful
and more disinterested bit of work.”

Headingly puffed thoughtfully at his cigarette.

“There is a house near ours, down on the Back Bay at Boston, which just
ruins the whole prospect,” said he. “It has old chairs littered about
the stoop, and the shingles are loose, and the garden runs wild; but I
don’t know that the neighbours are exactly justified in rushing in, and
stamping around, and running the thing on their own lines.”

“Not if it were on fire?” asked the Colonel.

Headingly laughed, and rose from his camp-stool.

“Well, it doesn’t come within the provisions of the Monroe Doctrine,
Colonel,” said he. “I’m beginning to realise that modern Egypt is every
bit as interesting as ancient, and that Rameses the Second wasn’t the
last live man in the country.”

The two Englishmen rose and yawned.

“Yes, it’s a whimsical freak of fortune which has sent men from a little
island in the Atlantic to administer the land of the Pharaohs,” remarked
Cecil Brown. “We shall pass away again, and never leave a trace among
these successive races who have held the country, for it is not an
Anglo-Saxon custom to write their deeds upon rocks. I dare say that the
remains of a Cairo drainage system will be our most permanent record,
unless they prove a thousand years hence that it was the work of the
Hyksos kings. But here is the shore party come back.”

Down below they could hear the mellow Irish accents of Mrs. Belmont and
the deep voice of her husband, the iron-grey rifle-shot. Mr. Stuart,
the fat Birmingham clergyman, was thrashing out a question of piastres
with a noisy donkey-boy, and the others were joining in with chaff and
advice. Then the hubbub died away, the party from above came down the
ladder, there were “good-nights,” the shutting of doors, and the little
steamer lay silent, dark, and motionless in the shadow of the high Halfa
bank. And beyond this one point of civilisation and of comfort there
lay the limitless, savage, unchangeable desert, straw-coloured and
dream-like in the moonlight, mottled over with the black shadows of the
hills.




CHAPTER III.


“Stoppa! Backa!” cried the native pilot to the European engineer.

The bluff bows of the stern-wheeler had squelched into the soft brown
mud, and the current had swept the boat alongside the bank. The long
gangway was thrown across, and the six tall soldiers of the Soudanese
escort filed along it, their light-blue gold-trimmed zouave uniforms,
and their jaunty yellow and red forage-caps, showing up bravely in the
clear morning light. Above them, on the top of the bank, was ranged the
line of donkeys, and the air was full of the clamour of the boys.
In shrill strident voices each was crying out the virtues of his own
beast, and abusing that of his neighbour.

Colonel Cochrane and Mr. Belmont stood together in the bows, each
wearing the broad white puggareed hat of the tourist. Miss Adams and
her niece leaned against the rail beside them.

“Sorry your wife isn’t coming, Belmont,” said the Colonel.

“I think she had a touch of the sun yesterday. Her head aches very
badly.”

His voice was strong and thick like his figure.

“I should stay to keep her company, Mr. Belmont,” said the little
American old maid; “but I learn that Mrs. Shlesinger finds the ride too
long for her, and has some letters which she must mail to-day, so Mrs.
Belmont will not be lonesome.”

“You’re very good, Miss Adams. We shall be back, you know, by two
o’clock.”

“Is that certain?”

“It must be certain, for we are taking no lunch with us, and we shall be
famished by then.”

“Yes, I expect we shall be ready for a hock and seltzer at any rate,”
said the Colonel. “This desert dust gives a flavour to the worst
wine.”

“Now, ladies and gentlemen!” cried Mansoor, the dragoman, moving forward
with something of the priest in his flowing garments and smooth,
clean-shaven face. “We must start early that we may return before the
meridial heat of the weather.” He ran his dark eyes over the little
group of his tourists with a paternal expression. “You take your green
glasses, Miss Adams, for glare very great out in the desert. Ah, Mr.
Stuart, I set aside very fine donkey for you--prize donkey, sir, always
put aside for the gentleman of most weight. Never mind to take your
monument ticket to-day. Now, ladies and gentlemen, if _you_ please!”

Like a grotesque frieze the party moved one by one along the plank
gangway and up the brown crumbling bank. Mr. Stephens led them, a thin,
dry, serious figure, in an English straw hat. His red “Baedeker”
gleamed under his arm, and in one hand he held a little paper of notes,
as if it were a brief. He took Miss Sadie by one arm and her aunt by
the other as they toiled up the bank, and the young girl’s laughter rang
frank and clear in the morning air as “Baedeker” came fluttering down at
their feet. Mr. Belmont and Colonel Cochrane followed, the brims of
their sun-hats touching as they discussed the relative advantages of the
Mauser, the Lebel, and the Lee-Metford. Behind them walked Cecil Brown,
listless, cynical, self-contained. The fat clergyman puffed slowly up
the bank, with many gasping witticisms at his own defects. “I’m one of
those men who carry everything before them,” said he, glancing ruefully
at his rotundity, and chuckling wheezily at his own little joke.
Last of all came Headingly, slight and tall, with the student stoop
about his shoulders, and Fardet, the good-natured, fussy, argumentative
Parisian.

“You see we have an escort to-day,” he whispered to his companion.

“So I observed.”

“Pah!” cried the Frenchman, throwing out his arms in derision; “as well
have an escort from Paris to Versailles. This is all part of the play,
Monsieur Headingly. It deceives no one, but it is part of the play.
_Pourquoi ces droles de militaires, dragoman, hein?_”

It was the dragoman’s _role_ to be all things to all men, so he looked
cautiously round before he answered, to make sure that the English were
mounted and out of earshot.

“_C’est ridicule, monsieur!_” said he, shrugging his fat shoulders.
“_Mais que voulez-vous? C’est l’ordre official Egyptien._”

“_Egyptien! Pah, Anglais, Anglais--toujours Anglais!_” cried the angry
Frenchman.

The frieze now was more grotesque than ever, but had changed suddenly to
an equestrian one, sharply outlined against the deep-blue Egyptian sky.
Those who have never ridden before have to ride in Egypt, and when the
donkeys break into a canter, and the Nile Irregulars are at full charge,
such a scene of flying veils, clutching hands, huddled swaying figures,
and anxious faces is nowhere to be seen. Belmont, his square figure
balanced upon a small white donkey, was waving his hat to his wife, who
had come out upon the saloon-deck of the _Korosko_. Cochrane sat very
erect with a stiff military seat, hands low, head high, and heels down,
while beside him rode the young Oxford man, looking about him with
drooping eyelids as if he thought the desert hardly respectable, and had
his doubts about the Universe. Behind them the whole party was strung
along the bank in varying stages of jolting and discomfort, a
brown-faced, noisy donkey-boy running after each donkey. Looking back,
they could see the little lead-coloured stern-wheeler, with the gleam of
Mrs. Belmont’s handkerchief from the deck. Beyond ran the broad, brown
river, winding down in long curves to where, five miles off, the square,
white block-houses upon the black, ragged hills marked the outskirts of
Wady Halfa, which had been their starting-point that morning.

“Isn’t it just too lovely for anything?” cried Sadie joyously. “I’ve
got a donkey that runs on casters, and the saddle is just elegant.
Did you ever see anything so cunning as these beads and things round his
neck? You must make a memo. _re_ donkey, Mr. Stephens. Isn’t that
correct legal English?”

Stephens looked at the pretty, animated, boyish face looking up at him
from under the coquettish straw hat, and he wished that he had the
courage to tell her in her own language that she was just too sweet for
anything. But he feared above all things lest he should offend her, and
so put an end to their present pleasant intimacy. So his compliment
dwindled into a smile.

“You look very happy,” said he.

“Well, who could help feeling good with this dry, clear air, and the
blue sky, and the crisp yellow sand, and a superb donkey to carry you?
I’ve just got everything in the world to make me happy.”

“Everything?”

“Well, everything I have any use for just now.”

“I suppose you never know what it is to be sad?”

“Oh, when I _am_ miserable, I am just too miserable for words. I’ve sat
and cried for days and days at Smith’s College, and the other girls were
just crazy to know what I was crying about, and guessing what the reason
was that I wouldn’t tell them, when all the time the real true reason
was that I didn’t know myself. You know how it comes like a great dark
shadow over you, and you don’t know why or wherefore, but you’ve just
got to settle down to it and be miserable.”

“But you never had any real cause?”

“No, Mr. Stephens, I’ve had such a good time all my life that I really
don’t think, when I look back, that I ever had any real cause for
sorrow.”

“Well, Miss Sadie, I hope with all my heart that you will be able to say
the same when you are the same age as your aunt. Surely I hear her
calling.”

“I wish, Mr. Stephens, you would strike my donkey-boy with your whip if
he hits the donkey again,” cried Miss Adams, jogging up on a high,
raw-boned beast. “Hi, dragoman, Mansoor, you tell this boy that I won’t
have the animals ill used, and that he ought to be ashamed of himself.
Yes, you little rascal, you ought! He’s grinning at me like an
advertisement for a tooth paste. Do you think, Mr. Stephens, that if I
were to knit that black soldier a pair of woollen stockings he would be
allowed to wear them? The poor creature has bandages round his legs.”

“Those are his putties, Miss Adams,” said Colonel Cochrane, looking
back at her. “We have found in India that they are the best support to
the leg in marching. They are very much better than any stocking.”

“Well, you don’t say! They remind me mostly of a sick horse. But it’s
elegant to have the soldiers with us, though Monsieur Fardet tells me
there’s nothing for us to be scared about.”

“That is only my opinion, Miss Adams,” said the Frenchman hastily.
“It may be that Colonel Cochrane thinks otherwise.”

“It is Monsieur Fardet’s opinion against that of the officers who have
the responsibility of caring for the safety of the frontier,” said the
Colonel coldly. “At least we will all agree that they have the effect
of making the scene very much more picturesque.”

The desert upon their right lay in long curves of sand, like the dunes
which might have fringed some forgotten primeval sea. Topping them they
could see the black, craggy summits of the curious volcanic hills which
rise upon the Libyan side. On the crest of the low sand-hills they
would catch a glimpse every now and then of a tall, sky-blue soldier,
walking swiftly, his rifle at the trail. For a moment the lank, warlike
figure would be sharply silhouetted against the sky. Then he would dip
into a hollow and disappear, while some hundred yards off another would
show for an instant and vanish.

“Wherever are they raised?” asked Sadie, watching the moving figures.
“They look to me just about the same tint as the hotel boys in the
States.”

“I thought some question might arise about them,” said Mr. Stephens, who
was never so happy as when he could anticipate some wish of the pretty
American. “I made one or two references this morning in the ship’s
library. Here it is--_re_--that’s to say, about black soldiers. I have
it on my notes that they are from the 10th Soudanese battalion of the
Egyptian army. They are recruited from the Dinkas and the Shilluks--two
negroid tribes living to the south of the Dervish country, near the
Equator.”

“How can the recruits come through the Dervishes, then?” asked Headingly
sharply.

“I dare say there is no such very great difficulty over that,” said
Monsieur Fardet, with a wink at the American.

“The older men are the remains of the old black battalions. Some of
them served with Gordon at Khartoum, and have his medal to show.
The others are many of them deserters from the Mahdi’s army,” said the
Colonel.

“Well, so long as they are not wanted, they look right elegant in those
blue jackets,” Miss Adams observed. “But if there was any trouble, I
guess we would wish they were less ornamental and a bit whiter.”

“I am not so sure of that, Miss Adams,” said the Colonel. “I have seen
these fellows in the field, and I assure you that I have the utmost
confidence in their steadiness.”

“Well, I’ll take your word without trying,” said Miss Adams, with a
decision which made every one smile.

So far their road had lain along the side of the river, which was
swirling down upon their left hand deep and strong from the cataracts
above. Here and there the rush of the current was broken by a black
shining boulder over which the foam was spouting. Higher up they could
see the white gleam of the rapids, and the banks grew into rugged
cliffs, which were capped by a peculiar, outstanding semi-circular rock.
It did not require the dragoman’s aid to tell the party that this was
the famous landmark to which they were bound. A long, level stretch lay
before them, and the donkeys took it at a canter. At the farther side
were scattered rocks, black upon orange; and in the midst of them rose
some broken shafts of pillars and a length of engraved wall, looking in
its greyness and its solidity more like some work of Nature than of man.
The fat, sleek dragoman had dismounted, and stood waiting in his
petticoats and his cover-coat for the stragglers to gather round him.

“This temple, ladies and gentlemen,” he cried, with the air of an
auctioneer who is about to sell it to the highest bidder, “very fine
example from the eighteenth dynasty. Here is the cartouche of Thotmes
the Third,” he pointed up with his donkey-whip at the rude, but deep,
hieroglyphics upon the wall above him. “He live sixteen hundred years
before Christ, and this is made to remember his victorious exhibition
into Mesopotamia. Here we have his history from the time that he was
with his mother, until he return with captives tied to his chariot.
In this you see him crowned with Lower Egypt, and with Upper Egypt
offering up sacrifice in honour of his victory to the God Ammon-ra.
Here he bring his captives before him, and he cut off each his right
hand. In this corner you see little pile--all right hands.”

“My sakes, I shouldn’t have liked to be here in those days,” said Miss
Adams.

“Why, there’s nothing altered,” remarked Cecil Brown. “The East is
still the East. I’ve no doubt that within a hundred miles, or perhaps a
good deal less, from where you stand--”

“Shut up!” whispered the Colonel, and the party shuffled on down the
line of the wall with their faces up and their big hats thrown
backwards. The sun behind them struck the old grey masonry with a
brassy glare, and carried on to it the strange black shadows of the
tourists, mixing them up with the grim, high-nosed, square-shouldered
warriors, and the grotesque, rigid deities who lined it. The broad
shadow of the Reverend John Stuart, of Birmingham, smudged out both the
heathen King and the god whom he worshipped.

“What’s this?” he was asking in his wheezy voice, pointing up with a
yellow Assouan cane.

“That is a hippopotamus,” said the dragoman; and the tourists all
tittered, for there was just a suspicion of Mr. Stuart himself in the
carving.

“But it isn’t bigger than a little pig,” he protested. “You see that
the King is putting his spear through it with ease.”

“They make it small to show that it was a very small thing to the King,”
said the dragoman. “So you see that all the King’s prisoners do not
exceed his knee--which is not because he was so much taller, but so much
more powerful. You see that he is bigger than his horse, because he is
a king and the other is only a horse. The same way, these small women
whom you see here and there are just his trivial little wives.”

“Well, now!” cried Miss Adams indignantly. “If they had sculpted that
King’s soul it would have needed a lens to see it. Fancy his allowing
his wives to be put in like that.”

“If he did it now, Miss Adams,” said the Frenchman, “he would have more
fighting than ever in Mesopotamia. But time brings revenge. Perhaps
the day will soon come when we have the picture of the big strong wife
and the trivial little husband--_hein?_”

Cecil Brown and Headingly had dropped behind, for the glib comments of
the dragoman, and the empty, light-hearted chatter of the tourists
jarred upon their sense of solemnity. They stood in silence watching
the grotesque procession, with its sun-hats and green veils, as it
passed in the vivid sunshine down the front of the old grey wall.
Above them two crested hoopoes were fluttering and calling amid the
ruins of the pylon.

“Isn’t it a sacrilege?” said the Oxford man at last.

“Well, now, I’m glad you feel that about it, because it’s how it always
strikes me,” Headingly answered with feeling. “I’m not quite clear in
my own mind how these things should be approached--if they are to be
approached at all--but I am sure this is not the way. On the whole, I
prefer the ruins that I have not seen to those which I have.”

The young diplomatist looked up with his peculiarly bright smile, which
faded away too soon into his languid, _blase_ mask.

“I’ve got a map,” said the American, “and sometimes far away from
anything in the very midst of the waterless, trackless desert, I see
‘ruins’ marked upon it--or ‘remains of a temple,’ perhaps. For example,
the temple of Jupiter Ammon, which was one of the most considerable
shrines in the world, was hundreds of miles away back of anywhere.
Those are the ruins, solitary, unseen, unchanging through the centuries,
which appeal to one’s imagination. But when I present a check at the
door, and go in as if it were Barnum’s show, all the subtle feeling of
romance goes right out of it.”

“Absolutely!” said Cecil Brown, looking over the desert with his dark,
intolerant eyes. “If one could come wandering here alone--stumble upon
it by chance, as it were--and find one’s self in absolute solitude in
the dim light of the temple, with these grotesque figures all round, it
would be perfectly overwhelming. A man would be prostrated with wonder
and awe. But when Belmont is puffing his bulldog pipe, and Stuart is
wheezing, and Miss Sadie Adams is laughing--”

“And that jay of a dragoman speaking his piece,” said Headingly;
“I want to stand and think all the time, and I never seem to get the
chance. I was ripe for manslaughter when I stood before the Great
Pyramid, and couldn’t get a quiet moment because they would boost me on
to the top. I took a kick at one man which would have sent _him_ to the
top in one jump if I had hit meat. But fancy travelling all the way
from America to see the pyramid, and then finding nothing better to do
than to kick an Arab in front of it!”

The Oxford man laughed in his gentle, tired fashion. “They are starting
again,” said he, and the two hastened forwards to take their places at
the tail of the absurd procession.

Their route ran now among large, scattered boulders, and between stony,
shingly hills. A narrow winding path curved in and out amongst the
rocks. Behind them their view was cut off by similar hills, black and
fantastic, like the slag-heaps at the shaft of a mine. A silence fell
upon the little company, and even Sadie’s bright face reflected the
harshness of Nature. The escort had closed in, and marched beside them,
their boots scrunching among the loose black rubble. Colonel Cochrane
and Belmont were still riding together in the van.

“Do you know, Belmont,” said the Colonel, in a low voice, “you may think
me a fool, but I don’t like this one little bit.”

Belmont gave a short gruff laugh.

“It seemed all right in the saloon of the _Korosko_, but now that we are
here we _do_ seem rather up in the air,” said he. “Still, you know, a
party comes here every week, and nothing has ever gone wrong.”

“I don’t mind taking my chances when I am on the war-path,” the Colonel
answered. “That’s all straightforward and in the way of business.
But when you have women with you, and a helpless crowd like this, it
becomes really dreadful. Of course, the chances are a hundred to one
that we have no trouble; but if we should have--well, it won’t bear
thinking about. The wonderful thing is their complete unconsciousness
that there is any danger whatever.”

“Well, I like the English tailor-made dresses well enough for walking,
Mr. Stephens,” said Miss Sadie from behind them. “But for an afternoon
dress, I think the French have more style than the English. Your
milliners have a more severe cut, and they don’t do the cunning little
ribbons and bows and things in the same way.”

The Colonel smiled at Belmont.

“_She_ is quite serene in her mind, at any rate,” said he. “Of course,
I wouldn’t say what I think to any one but you, and I daresay it will
all prove to be quite unfounded.”

“Well, I could imagine parties of Dervishes on the prowl,” said Belmont.
“But what I cannot imagine is that they should just happen to come to
the pulpit rock on the very morning when we are due there.”

“Considering that our movements have been freely advertised, and that
every one knows a week beforehand what our programme is, and where we
are to be found, it does not strike me as being such a wonderful
coincidence.”

“It is a very remote chance,” said Belmont stoutly, but he was glad in
his heart that his wife was safe and snug on board the steamer.

And now they were clear of the rocks again, with a fine stretch of firm
yellow sand extending to the very base of the conical hill which lay
before them. “Ay-ah! Ay-ah!” cried the boys, whack came their sticks
upon the flanks of the donkeys, which broke into a gallop, and away they
all streamed over the plain. It was not until they had come to the end
of the path which curves up the hill that the dragoman called a halt.

“Now, ladies and gentlemen, we are arrived for the so famous pulpit rock
of Abousir. From the summit you will presently enjoy a panorama of
remarkable fertility. But first you will observe that over the rocky
side of the hill are everywhere cut the names of great men who have
passed it in their travels, and some of these names are older than the
time of Christ.”

“Got Moses?” asked Miss Adams.

“Auntie, I’m surprised at you!” cried Sadie.

“Well, my dear, he was in Egypt, and he was a great man, and he may have
passed this way.”

“Moses’s name very likely there, and the same with Herodotus,” said the
dragoman gravely. “Both have been long worn away. But there on the
brown rock you will see Belzoni. And up higher is Gordon. There is
hardly a name famous in the Soudan which you will not find, if you like.
And now, with your permission, we shall take good-bye of our donkeys and
walk up the path, and you will see the river and the desert from the
summit of the top.”

A minute or two of climbing brought them out upon the semicircular
platform which crowns the rock. Below them on the far side was a
perpendicular black cliff, a hundred and fifty feet high, with the
swirling, foam-streaked river roaring past its base. The swish of the
water and the low roar as it surged over the mid-stream boulders boomed
through the hot, stagnant air. Far up and far down they could see the
course of the river, a quarter of a mile in breadth, and running very
deep and strong, with sleek black eddies and occasional spoutings of
foam. On the other side was a frightful wilderness of black, scattered
rocks, which were the _debris_ carried down by the river at high flood.
In no direction were there any signs of human beings or their dwellings.

“On the far side,” said the dragoman, waving his donkey-whip towards the
east, “is the military line which conducts Wady Halfa to Sarras.
Sarras lies to the south, under that black hill. Those two blue
mountains which you see very far away are in Dongola, more than a
hundred miles from Sarras. The railway there is forty miles long, and
has been much annoyed by the Dervishes, who are very glad to turn the
rails into spears. The telegraph wires are also much appreciated
thereby. Now, if you will kindly turn round, I will explain, also, what
we see upon the other side.”

It was a view which, when once seen, must always haunt the mind.
Such an expanse of savage and unrelieved desert might be part of some
cold and burned-out planet rather than of this fertile and bountiful
earth. Away and away it stretched to die into a soft, violet haze in
the extremest distance. In the foreground the sand was of a bright
golden yellow, which was quite dazzling in the sunshine. Here and
there, in a scattered cordon, stood the six trusty negro soldiers
leaning motionless upon their rifles, and each throwing a shadow which
looked as solid as himself. But beyond this golden plain lay a low line
of those black slag-heaps, with yellow sand-valleys winding between
them. These in their turn were topped by higher and more fantastic
hills, and these by others, peeping over each other’s shoulders until
they blended with that distant violet haze. None of these hills were of
any height--a few hundred feet at the most--but their savage,
saw-toothed crests, and their steep scarps of sun-baked stone, gave them
a fierce character of their own.

“The Libyan Desert,” said the dragoman, with a proud wave of his hand.
“The greatest desert in the world. Suppose you travel right west from
here, and turn neither to the north nor to the south, the first houses
you would come to would be in America. That make you home-sick, Miss
Adams, I believe?”

But the American old maid had her attention drawn away by the conduct of
Sadie, who had caught her arm by one hand and was pointing over the
desert with the other.

“Well, now, if that isn’t too picturesque for anything!” she cried, with
a flush of excitement upon her pretty face. “Do look, Mr. Stephens!
That’s just the one only thing we wanted to make it just perfectly
grand. See the men upon the camels coming out from between those
hills!”

They all looked at the long string of red-turbaned riders who were
winding out of the ravine, and there fell such a hush that the buzzing
of the flies sounded quite loud upon their ears. Colonel Cochrane had
lit a match, and he stood with it in one hand and the unlit cigarette in
the other until the flame licked round his fingers. Belmont whistled.
The dragoman stood staring with his mouth half-open, and a curious slaty
tint in his full, red lips. The others looked from one to the other
with an uneasy sense that there was something wrong. It was the Colonel
who broke the silence.

“By George, Belmont, I believe the hundred-to-one chance has come off!”
said he.




CHAPTER IV.


“What’s the meaning of this, Mansoor?” cried Belmont harshly. “Who are
these people, and why are you standing staring as if you had lost your
senses?”

The dragoman made an effort to compose himself, and licked his dry lips
before he answered.

“I do not know who they are,” said he in a quavering voice.

“Who they are?” cried the Frenchman. “You can see who they are.
They are armed men upon camels, Ababdeh, Bishareen--Bedouins, in short,
such as are employed by the Government upon the frontier.”

“Be Jove, he may be right, Cochrane,” said Belmont, looking inquiringly
at the Colonel. “Why shouldn’t it be as he says? why shouldn’t these
fellows be friendlies?”

“There are no friendlies upon this side of the river,” said the Colonel
abruptly; “I am perfectly certain about that. There is no use in
mincing matters. We must prepare for the worst.”

But in spite of his words, they stood stock-still, in a huddled group,
staring out over the plain. Their nerves were numbed by the sudden
shock, and to all of them it was like a scene in a dream, vague,
impersonal, and un-real. The men upon the camels had streamed out from
a gorge which lay a mile or so distant on the side of the path along
which they had travelled. Their retreat, therefore, was entirely cut
off. It appeared, from the dust and the length of the line, to be quite
an army which was emerging from the hills, for seventy men upon camels
cover a considerable stretch of ground. Having reached the sandy plain,
they very deliberately formed to the front, and then at the harsh call
of a bugle they trotted forward in line, the parti-coloured figures all
swaying and the sand smoking in a rolling yellow cloud at the heels of
their camels. At the same moment the six black soldiers doubled in from
the front with their Martinis at the trail, and snuggled down like
well-trained skirmishers behind the rocks upon the haunch of the hill.
Their breech blocks all snapped together as their corporal gave them the
order to load.

And now suddenly the first stupor of the excursionists passed away, and
was succeeded by a frantic and impotent energy. They all ran about upon
the plateau of rock in an aimless, foolish flurry, like frightened fowls
in a yard. They could not bring themselves to acknowledge that there
was no possible escape for them. Again and again they rushed to the
edge of the great cliff which rose from the river, but the youngest and
most daring of them could never have descended it. The two women clung
one on each side of the trembling Mansoor, with a feeling that he was
officially responsible for their safety. When he ran up and down in his
desperation, his skirts and theirs all fluttered together. Stephens,
the lawyer, kept close to Sadie Adams, muttering mechanically, “Don’t be
alarmed, Miss Sadie; don’t be at all alarmed!” though his own limbs were
twitching with agitation. Monsieur Fardet stamped about with a guttural
rolling of r’s, glancing angrily at his companions as if they had in
some way betrayed him; while the fat clergyman stood with his umbrella
up, staring stolidly with big, frightened eyes at the camel-men.
Cecil Brown curled his small, prim moustache, and looked white, but
contemptuous. The Colonel, Belmont, and the young Harvard graduate were
the three most cool-headed and resourceful members of the party.

“Better stick together,” said the Colonel. “There’s no escape for us,
so we may as well remain united.”

“They’ve halted,” said Belmont.

“They are reconnoitring us. They know very well that there is no escape
from them, and they are taking their time. I don’t see what we can do.”

“Suppose we hide the women,” Headingly suggested. “They can’t know how
many of us are here. When they have taken us, the women can come out of
their hiding-place and make their way back to the boat.”

“Admirable!” cried Colonel Cochrane. “Admirable! This way, please, Miss
Adams. Bring the ladies here, Mansoor. There is not an instant to be
lost.”

There was a part of the plateau which was invisible from the plain, and
here in feverish haste they built a little cairn. Many flaky slabs of
stone were lying about, and it did not take long to prop the largest of
these against a rock, so as to make a lean-to, and then to put two
side-pieces to complete it. The slabs were of the same colour as the
rock, so that to a casual glance the hiding-place was not very visible.
The two ladies were squeezed into this, and they crouched together,
Sadie’s arms thrown round her aunt. When they had walled them up, the
men turned with lighter hearts to see what was going on. As they did so
there rang out the sharp, peremptory crack of a rifle-shot from the
escort, followed by another and another, but these isolated shots were
drowned in the long, spattering roll of an irregular volley from the
plain, and the air was full of the phit-phit-phit of the bullets.
The tourists all huddled behind the rocks, with the exception of the
Frenchman, who still stamped angrily about, striking his sun-hat with
his clenched hand. Belmont and Cochrane crawled down to where the
Soudanese soldiers were firing slowly and steadily, resting their rifles
upon the boulders in front of them.

The Arabs had halted about five hundred yards away, and it was evident
from their leisurely movements that they were perfectly aware that there
was no possible escape for the travellers. They had paused to ascertain
their number before closing in upon them. Most of them were firing from
the backs of their camels, but a few had dismounted and were kneeling
here and there--little shimmering white spots against the golden
back-ground. Their shots came sometimes singly in quick, sharp throbs,
and sometimes in a rolling volley, with a sound like a boy’s stick drawn
across iron railings. The hill buzzed like a bee-hive, and the bullets
made a sharp crackling as they struck against the rocks.

“You do no good by exposing yourself,” said Belmont, drawing Colonel
Cochrane behind a large jagged boulder, which already furnished a
shelter for three of the Soudanese. “A bullet is the best we have to
hope for,” said Cochrane grimly. “What an infernal fool I have been,
Belmont, not to protest more energetically against this ridiculous
expedition! I deserve whatever I get, but it _is_ hard on these poor
souls who never knew the danger.”

“I suppose there’s no help for us?”

“Not the faintest.”

“Don’t you think this firing might bring the troops up from Halfa?”

“They’ll never hear it. It is a good six miles from here to the
steamer. From that to Halfa would be another five.”

“Well, when we don’t return, the steamer will give the alarm.”

“And where shall we be by that time?”

“My poor Norah! My poor little Norah!” muttered Belmont, in the depths
of his grizzled moustache.

“What do you suppose that they will do with us, Cochrane?” he asked
after a pause.

“They may cut our throats, or they may take us as slaves to Khartoum.
I don’t know that there is much to choose. There’s one of us out of his
troubles anyhow.”

The soldier next them had sat down abruptly, and leaned forward over his
knees. His movement and attitude were so natural that it was hard to
realise that he had been shot through the head. He neither stirred nor
groaned. His comrades bent over him for a moment, and then, shrugging
their shoulders, they turned their dark faces to the Arabs once more.
Belmont picked up the dead man’s Martini and his ammunition-pouch.

“Only three more rounds, Cochrane,” said he, with the little brass
cylinders upon the palm of his hand. “We’ve let them shoot too soon,
and too often. We should have waited for the rush.”

“You’re a famous shot, Belmont,” cried the Colonel. “I’ve heard of you
as one of the cracks. Don’t you think you could pick off their leader?”

“Which is he?”

“As far as I can make out, it is that one on the white camel on their
right front. I mean the fellow who is peering at us from under his two
hands.”

Belmont thrust in his cartridge and altered the sights. “It’s a
shocking bad light for judging distance,” said he. “This is where the
low point-blank trajectory of the Lee-Metford comes in useful. Well,
we’ll try him at five hundred.” He fired, but there was no change in
the white camel or the peering rider.

“Did you see any sand fly?”

“No, I saw nothing.”

“I fancy I took my sight a trifle too full.”

“Try him again.”

Man and rifle and rock were equally steady, but again the camel and
chief remained un-harmed. The third shot must have been nearer, for he
moved a few paces to the right, as if he were becoming restless.
Belmont threw the empty rifle down, with an exclamation of disgust.

“It’s this confounded light,” he cried, and his cheeks flushed with
annoyance. “Think of my wasting three cartridges in that fashion!
If I had him at Bisley I’d shoot the turban off him, but this vibrating
glare means refraction. What’s the matter with the Frenchman?”

Monsieur Fardet was stamping about the plateau with the gestures of a
man who has been stung by a wasp. “_S’cre nom! S’cre nom!_” he
shouted, showing his strong white teeth under his black waxed moustache.
He wrung his right hand violently, and as he did so he sent a little
spray of blood from his finger-tips. A bullet had chipped his wrist.
Headingly ran out from the cover where he had been crouching, with the
intention of dragging the demented Frenchman into a place of safety, but
he had not taken three paces before he was himself hit in the loins, and
fell with a dreadful crash among the stones. He staggered to his feet,
and then fell again in the same place, floundering up and down like a
horse which has broken its back. “I’m done!” he whispered, as the
Colonel ran to his aid, and then he lay still, with his china-white
cheek against the black stones. When, but a year before, he had
wandered under the elms of Cambridge, surely the last fate upon this
earth which he could have predicted for himself would be that he should
be slain by the bullet of a fanatical Mohammedan in the wilds of the
Libyan Desert.

Meanwhile the fire of the escort had ceased, for they had shot away
their last cartridge. A second man had been killed, and a third--who
was the corporal in charge--had received a bullet in his thigh. He sat
upon a stone, tying up his injury with a grave, preoccupied look upon
his wrinkled black face, like an old woman piecing together a broken
plate. The three others fastened their bayonets with a determined
metallic rasp and snap, and the air of men who intended to sell their
lives dearly.

“They’re coming!” cried Belmont, looking over the plain.

“Let them come!” the Colonel answered, putting his hands into his
trouser-pockets. Suddenly he pulled one fist out, and shook it
furiously in the air. “Oh, the cads! the confounded cads!” he shouted,
and his eyes were congested with rage.

It was the fate of the poor donkey-boys which had carried the
self-contained soldier out of his usual calm. During the firing they
had remained huddled, a pitiable group, among the rocks at the base of
the hill. Now upon the conviction that the charge of the Dervishes must
come first upon them, they had sprung upon their animals with shrill,
inarticulate cries of fear, and had galloped off across the plain.
A small flanking-party of eight or ten camel-men had worked round while
the firing had been going on, and these dashed in among the flying
donkey-boys, hacking and hewing with a cold-blooded, deliberate
ferocity. One little boy, in a flapping Galabeeah, kept ahead of his
pursuers for a time, but the long stride of the camels ran him down, and
an Arab thrust his spear into the middle of his stooping back. The
small, white-clad corpses looked like a flock of sheep trailing over the
desert.

But the people upon the rock had no time to think of the cruel fate of
the donkey-boys. Even the Colonel, after that first indignant outburst,
had forgotten all about them. The advancing camel-men had trotted to
the bottom of the hill, had dismounted, and leaving their camels
kneeling, had rushed furiously onward. Fifty of them were clambering up
the path and over the rocks together, their red turbans appearing and
vanishing again as they scrambled over the boulders. Without a shot or
a pause they surged over the three black soldiers, killing one and
stamping the other two down under their hurrying feet. So they burst on
to the plateau at the top, where an unexpected resistance checked them
for an instant.

The travellers, nestling up against one another, had awaited, each after
his own fashion, the coming of the Arabs. The Colonel, with his hands
back in his trouser-pockets, tried to whistle out of his dry lips.
Belmont folded his arms and leaned against a rock, with a sulky frown
upon his lowering face. So strangely do our minds act that his three
successive misses, and the tarnish to his reputation as a marksman, was
troubling him more than his impending fate. Cecil Brown stood erect,
and plucked nervously at the up-turned points of his little prim
moustache. Monsieur Fardet groaned over his wounded wrist.
Mr. Stephens, in sombre impotence, shook his head slowly, the living
embodiment of prosaic law and order. Mr. Stuart stood, his umbrella
still over him, with no expression upon his heavy face, or in his
staring brown eyes. Headingly lay with that china-white cheek resting
motionless upon the stones. His sun-hat had fallen off, and he looked
quite boyish with his ruffled yellow hair and his un-lined, clean-cut
face. The dragoman sat upon a stone and played nervously with his
donkey-whip. So the Arabs found them when they reached the summit of
the hill.

And then, just as the foremost rushed to lay hands upon them, a most
unexpected incident arrested them. From the time of the first
appearance of the Dervishes the fat clergyman of Birmingham had looked
like a man in a cataleptic trance. He had neither moved nor spoken.
But now he suddenly woke at a bound into strenuous and heroic energy.
It may have been the mania of fear, or it may have been the blood of
some Berserk ancestor which stirred suddenly in his veins; but he broke
into a wild shout, and, catching up a stick, he struck right and left
among the Arabs with a fury which was more savage than their own.
One who helped to draw up this narrative has left it upon record that,
of all the pictures which have been burned into his brain, there is none
so clear as that of this man, his large face shining with perspiration,
and his great body dancing about with unwieldy agility, as he struck at
the shrinking, snarling savages. Then a spear-head flashed from behind
a rock with a quick, vicious, upward thrust, the clergyman fell upon his
hands and knees, and the horde poured over him to seize their
unresisting victims. Knives glimmered before their eyes, rude hands
clutched at their wrists and at their throats, and then, with brutal and
unreasoning violence, they were hauled and pushed down the steep winding
path to where the camels were waiting below. The Frenchman waved his
unwounded hand as he walked. “_Vive le Khalifa! Vive le Madhi!_” he
shouted, until a blow from behind with the butt-end of a Remington beat
him into silence.

And now they were herded in at the base of the Abousir rock, this little
group of modern types who had fallen into the rough clutch of the
seventh century--for in all save the rifles in their hands there was
nothing to distinguish these men from the desert warriors who first
carried the crescent flag out of Arabia. The East does not change, and
the Dervish raiders were not less brave, less cruel, or less fanatical
than their forebears. They stood in a circle, leaning upon their guns
and spears, and looking with exultant eyes at the dishevelled group of
captives. They were clad in some approach to a uniform, red turbans
gathered around the neck as well as the head, so that the fierce face
looked out of a scarlet frame; yellow, untanned shoes, and white tunics
with square brown patches let into them. All carried rifles, and one
had a small discoloured bugle slung over his shoulder. Half of them
were negroes--fine, muscular men, with the limbs of a jet Hercules; and
the other half were Baggara Arabs--small, brown, and wiry, with little,
vicious eyes, and thin, cruel lips. The chief was also a Baggara, but
he was a taller man than the others, with a black beard which came down
over his chest, and a pair of hard, cold eyes, which gleamed like glass
from under his thick, black brows. They were fixed now upon his
captives, and his features were grave with thought. Mr. Stuart had been
brought down, his hat gone, his face still flushed with anger, and his
trousers sticking in one part to his leg. The two surviving Soudanese
soldiers, their black faces and blue coats blotched with crimson, stood
silently at attention upon one side of this forlorn group of castaways.

The chief stood for some minutes, stroking his black beard, while his
fierce eyes glanced from one pale face to another along the miserable
line of his captives. In a harsh, imperious voice he said something
which brought Mansoor, the dragoman, to the front, with bent back and
outstretched supplicating palms. To his employers there had always
seemed to be something comic in that flapping skirt and short cover-coat
above it; but now, under the glare of the mid-day sun, with those faces
gathered round them, it appeared rather to add a grotesque horror to the
scene. The dragoman salaamed and salaamed like some ungainly automatic
doll, and then, as the chief rasped out a curt word or two, he fell
suddenly upon his face, rubbing his forehead into the sand, and flapping
upon it with his hands.

“What’s that, Cochrane?” asked Belmont. “Why is he making an exhibition
of himself?”

“As far as I can understand, it is all up with us,” the Colonel
answered.

“But this is absurd,” cried the Frenchman excitedly; “why should these
people wish any harm to me? I have never injured them. On the other
hand, I have always been their friend. If I could but speak to them, I
would make them comprehend. Hola, dragoman, Mansoor!”

The excited gestures of Monsieur Fardet drew the sinister eyes of the
Baggara chief upon him. Again he asked a curt question, and Mansoor,
kneeling in front of him, answered it.

“Tell him that I am a Frenchman, dragoman. Tell him that I am a friend
of the Khalifa. Tell him that my countrymen have never had any quarrel
with him, but that his enemies are also ours.”

“The chief asks what religion you call your own,” said Mansoor. “The
Khalifa, he says, has no necessity for any friendship from those who are
infidels and unbelievers.”

“Tell him that in France we look upon all religions as good.”

“The chief says that none but a blaspheming dog and the son of a dog
would say that all religions are one as good as the other. He says that
if you are indeed the friend of the Khalifa, you will accept the Koran
and become a true believer upon the spot. If you will do so he will
promise on his side to send you alive to Khartoum.”

“And if not?”

“You will fare in the same way as the others.”

“Then you may make my compliments to monsieur the chief, and tell him
that it is not the custom for Frenchmen to change their religion under
compulsion.”

The chief said a few words, and then turned to consult with a short,
sturdy Arab at his elbow.

“He says, Monsieur Fardet,” said the dragoman, “that if you speak again
he will make a trough out of you for the dogs to feed from. Say nothing
to anger him, sir, for he is now talking what is to be done with us.”

“Who is he?” asked the Colonel.

“It is Ali Wad Ibrahim, the same who raided last year, and killed all of
the Nubian village.”

“I’ve heard of him,” said the Colonel. “He has the name of being one of
the boldest and the most fanatical of all the Khalifa’s leaders. Thank
God that the women are out of his clutches.”

The two Arabs had been talking in that stern, restrained fashion which
comes so strangely from a southern race. Now they both turned to the
dragoman, who was still kneeling upon the sand. They plied him with
questions, pointing first to one and then to another of their prisoners.
Then they conferred together once more, and finally said something to
Mansoor, with a contemptuous wave of the hand to indicate that he might
convey it to the others.

“Thank Heaven, gentlemen, I think that we are saved for the present
time,” said Mansoor, wiping away the sand which had stuck to his
perspiring forehead. “Ali Wad Ibrahim says that though an unbeliever
should have only the edge of the sword from one of the sons of the
Prophet, yet it might be of more profit to the beit-el-mal at Omdurman
if it had the gold which your people will pay for you. Until it comes
you can work as the slaves of the Khalifa, unless he should decide to
put you to death. You are to mount yourselves upon the spare camels and
to ride with the party.”

The chief had waited for the end of the explanation. “Now he gave a
brief order, and a negro stepped forward with a long, dull-coloured
sword in his hand. The dragoman squealed like a rabbit who sees a
ferret, and threw himself frantically down upon the sand once more.

“What is it, Cochrane?” asked Cecil Brown--for the Colonel had served in
the East, and was the only one of the travellers who had a smattering of
Arabic.

“As far as I can make out, he says there is no use keeping the dragoman,
as no one would trouble to pay a ransom for him, and he is too fat to
make a good slave.”

“Poor devil!” cried Brown. “Here, Cochrane, tell them to let him go.
We can’t let him be butchered like this in front of us. Say that we
will find the money amongst us. I will be answerable for any reasonable
sum.”

“I’ll stand in as far as my means will allow,” cried Belmont.

“We will sign a joint bond or indemnity,” said the lawyer. “If I had a
paper and pencil I could throw it into shape in an instant, and the
chief could rely upon its being perfectly correct and valid.”

But the Colonel’s Arabic was insufficient, and Mansoor himself was too
maddened by fear to understand the offer which was being made for him.
The negro looked a question at the chief, and then his long black arm
swung upwards and his sword hissed over his shoulder. But the dragoman
had screamed out something which arrested the blow, and which brought
the chief and the lieutenant to his side with a new interest upon their
swarthy faces. The others crowded in also, and formed a dense circle
around the grovelling, pleading man.

The Colonel had not understood this sudden change, nor had the others
fathomed the reason of it, but some instinct flashed it upon Stephens’s
horrified perceptions.

“Oh, you villain!” he cried furiously. “Hold your tongue, you miserable
creature! Be silent! Better die--a thousand times better die!”

But it was too late, and already they could all see the base design by
which the coward hoped to save his own life. He was about to betray the
women. They saw the chief, with a brave man’s contempt upon his stern
face, make a sign of haughty assent, and then Mansoor spoke rapidly and
earnestly, pointing up the hill. At a word from the Baggara, a dozen of
the raiders rushed up the path and were lost to view upon the top.
Then came a shrill cry, a horrible strenuous scream of surprise and
terror, and an instant later the party streamed into sight again,
dragging the women in their midst. Sadie, with her young, active limbs,
kept up with them, as they sprang down the slope, encouraging her aunt
all the while over her shoulder. The older lady, struggling amid the
rushing white figures, looked with her thin limbs and open mouth like a
chicken being dragged from a coop.

The chief’s dark eyes glanced indifferently at Miss Adams, but gazed
with a smouldering fire at the younger woman. Then he gave an abrupt
order, and the prisoners were hurried in a miserable, hopeless drove to
the cluster of kneeling camels. Their pockets had already been
ransacked, and the contents thrown into one of the camel-food bags, the
neck of which was tied up by Ali Wad Ibrahim’s own hands.

“I say, Cochrane,” whispered Belmont, looking with smouldering eyes at
the wretched Mansoor, “I’ve got a little hip revolver which they have
not discovered. Shall I shoot that cursed dragoman for giving away the
women?”

The Colonel shook his head.

“You had better keep it,” said he, with a sombre face. “The women may
find some other use for it before all is over.”




CHAPTER V.


The camels, some brown and some white, were kneeling in a long line,
their champing jaws moving rhythmically from side to side, and their
gracefully poised heads turning to right and left in a mincing,
self-conscious fashion. Most of them were beautiful creatures, true
Arabian trotters, with the slim limbs and finely turned necks which mark
the breed; but among them were a few of the slower, heavier beasts, with
ungroomed skins, disfigured by the black scars of old firings. These
were loaded with the doora and the waterskins of the raiders, but a few
minutes sufficed to redistribute their loads and to make place for the
prisoners. None of these had been bound with the exception of Mr.
Stuart--for the Arabs, understanding that he was a clergyman, and
accustomed to associate religion with violence, had looked upon his
fierce outburst as quite natural, and regarded him now as the most
dangerous and enterprising of their captives. His hands were therefore
tied together with a plaited camel-halter, but the others, including the
dragoman and the two wounded blacks, were allowed to mount without any
precaution against their escape, save that which was afforded by the
slowness of their beasts. Then, with a shouting of men and a roaring of
camels, the creatures were jolted on to their legs, and the long,
straggling procession set off with its back to the homely river, and its
face to the shimmering, violet haze, which hung round the huge sweep of
beautiful, terrible desert, striped tiger-fashion with black rock and
with golden sand.

None of the white prisoners, with the exception of Colonel Cochrane, had
ever been upon a camel before. It seemed an alarming distance to the
ground when they looked down, and the curious swaying motion, with the
insecurity of the saddle, made them sick and frightened. But their
bodily discomfort was forgotten in the turmoil of bitter thoughts
within. What a chasm gaped between their old life and their new! And
yet how short was the time and space which divided them! Less than an
hour ago they had stood upon the summit of that rock, and had laughed
and chattered, or grumbled at the heat and flies, becoming peevish at
small discomforts. Headingly had been hypercritical over the tints of
Nature. They could not forget his own tint as he lay with his cheek
upon the black stone. Sadie had chattered about tailor-made dresses and
Parisian chiffons. Now she was clinging, half-crazy, to the pommel of a
wooden saddle, with suicide rising as a red star of hope in her mind.
Humanity, reason, argument--all were gone, and there remained the brutal
humiliation of force. And all the time, down there by the second rocky
point, their steamer was waiting for them--their saloon, with the white
napery and the glittering glasses, the latest novel, and the London
papers. The least imaginative of them could see it so clearly: the
white awning, Mrs. Shlesinger with her yellow sun-hat, Mrs. Belmont
lying back in the canvas chair. There it lay almost in sight of them,
that little floating chip broken off from home, and every silent,
ungainly step of the camels was carrying them more hopelessly away from
it. That very morning how beneficent Providence had appeared, how
pleasant was life!--a little commonplace, perhaps, but so soothing and
restful. And now!

The red head-gear, patched jibbehs, and yellow boots had already shown
to the Colonel that these men were no wandering party of robbers, but a
troop from the regular army of the Khalifa. Now, as they struck across
the desert, they showed that they possessed the rude discipline which
their work demanded. A mile ahead, and far out on either flank, rode
their scouts, dipping and rising among the yellow sand-hills. Ali Wad
Ibrahim headed the caravan, and his short, sturdy lieutenant brought up
the rear. The main party straggled over a couple of hundred yards, and
in the middle was the little, dejected clump of prisoners. No attempt
was made to keep them apart, and Mr. Stephens soon contrived that his
camel should be between those of the two ladies.

“Don’t be down-hearted, Miss Adams,” said he. “This is a most
indefensible outrage, but there can be no question that steps will be
taken in the proper quarter to set the matter right. I am convinced
that we shall be subjected to nothing worse than a temporary
inconvenience. If it had not been for that villain Mansoor, you need
not have appeared at all.”

It was shocking to see the change in the little Bostonian lady, for she
had shrunk to an old woman in an hour. Her swarthy cheeks had fallen
in, and her eyes shone wildly from sunken, darkened sockets.
Her frightened glances were continually turned upon Sadie. There is
surely some wrecker angel which can only gather her best treasures in
moments of disaster. For here were all these worldlings going to their
doom, and already frivolity and selfishness had passed away from them,
and each was thinking and grieving only for the other. Sadie thought of
her aunt, her aunt thought of Sadie, the men thought of the women,
Belmont thought of his wife--and then he thought of something else also,
and he kicked his camel’s shoulder with his heel, until he found himself
upon the near side of Miss Adams.

“I’ve got something for you here,” he whispered. “We may be separated
soon, so it is as well to make our arrangements.”

“Separated!” wailed Miss Adams.

“Don’t speak loud, for that infernal Mansoor may give us away again.
I hope it won’t be so, but it might. We must be prepared for the worst.
For example, they might determine to get rid of us men and to keep you.”

Miss Adams shuddered.

“What am I to do? For God’s sake tell me what I am to do, Mr. Belmont!
I am an old woman. I have had my day. I could stand it if it was only
myself. But Sadie--I am clean crazed when I think of her. There’s her
mother waiting at home, and I--” She clasped her thin hands together in
the agony of her thoughts.

“Put your hand out under your dust-cloak,” said Belmont, sidling his
camel up against hers. “Don’t miss your grip of it. There! Now hide
it in your dress, and you’ll always have a key to unlock any door.”

Miss Adams felt what it was which he had slipped into her hand, and she
looked at him for a moment in bewilderment. Then she pursed up her lips
and shook her stern, brown face in disapproval. But she pushed the
little pistol into its hiding-place, all the same, and she rode with her
thoughts in a whirl. Could this indeed be she, Eliza Adams, of Boston,
whose narrow, happy life had oscillated between the comfortable house in
Commonwealth Avenue and the Tremont Presbyterian Church? Here she was,
hunched upon a camel, with her hand upon the butt of a pistol, and her
mind weighing the justifications of murder. Oh, life, sly, sleek,
treacherous life, how are we ever to trust you? Show us your worst and
we can face it, but it is when you are sweetest and smoothest that we
have most to fear from you.

“At the worst, Miss Sadie, it will only be a question of ransom,” said
Stephens, arguing against his own convictions. “Besides, we are still
close to Egypt, far away from the Dervish country. There is sure to be
an energetic pursuit. You must try not to lose your courage, and to
hope for the best.”

“No, I am not scared, Mr. Stephens,” said Sadie, turning towards him a
blanched face which belied her words. “We’re all in God’s hands, and
surely He won’t be cruel to us. It is easy to talk about trusting Him
when things are going well, but now is the real test. If He’s up there
behind that blue heaven--”

“He is,” said a voice behind them, and they found that the Birmingham
clergyman had joined the party. His tied hands clutched on to his
Makloofa saddle, and his fat body swayed dangerously from side to side
with every stride of the camel. His wounded leg was oozing with blood
and clotted with flies, and the burning desert sun beat down upon his
bare head, for he had lost both hat and umbrella in the scuffle.
A rising fever flecked his large, white cheeks with a touch of colour,
and brought a light into his brown ox-eyes. He had always seemed a
somewhat gross and vulgar person to his fellow-travellers. Now, this
bitter healing draught of sorrow had transformed him. He was purified,
spiritualised, exalted. He had become so calmly strong that he made the
others feel stronger as they looked upon him. He spoke of life and of
death, of the present, and their hopes of the future; and the black
cloud of their misery began to show a golden rift or two. Cecil Brown
shrugged his shoulders, for he could not change in an hour the
convictions of his life; but the others, even Fardet, the Frenchman,
were touched and strengthened. They all took off their hats when he
prayed. Then the Colonel made a turban out of his red silk cummerbund,
and insisted that Mr. Stuart should wear it. With his homely dress and
gorgeous headgear, he looked like a man who has dressed up to amuse the
children.

And now the dull, ceaseless, insufferable torment of thirst was added to
the aching weariness which came from the motion of the camels. The sun
glared down upon them, and then up again from the yellow sand, and the
great plain shimmered and glowed until they felt as if they were riding
over a cooling sheet of molten metal. Their lips were parched and
dried, and their tongues like tags of leather. They lisped curiously in
their speech, for it was only the vowel sounds which would come without
an effort. Miss Adams’s chin had dropped upon her chest, and her great
hat concealed her face.

“Auntie will faint if she does not get water,” said Sadie. “Oh, Mr.
Stephens, is there nothing we could do?”

The Dervishes riding near were all Baggara with the exception of one
negro--an uncouth fellow with a face pitted with small-pox.
His expression seemed good-natured when compared with that of his Arab
comrades, and Stephens ventured to touch his elbow and to point to his
water-skin, and then to the exhausted lady. The negro shook his head
brusquely, but at the same time he glanced significantly towards the
Arabs, as if to say that, if it were not for them, he might act
differently. Then he laid his black forefinger upon the breast of his
jibbeh.

“Tippy Tilly,” said he.

“What’s that?” asked Colonel Cochrane.

“Tippy Tilly,” repeated the negro, sinking his voice as if he wished
only the prisoners to hear him.

The Colonel shook his head.

“My Arabic won’t bear much strain. I don’t know what he is saying,”
said he.

“Tippy Tilly. Hicks Pasha,” the negro repeated.

“I believe the fellow is friendly to us, but I can’t quite make him
out,” said Cochrane to Belmont. “Do you think that he means that his
name is Tippy Tilly, and that he killed Hicks Pasha?”

The negro showed his great white teeth at hearing his own words coming
back to him. “Aiwa!” said he. “Tippy Tilly--Bimbashi Mormer--Boum!”

“By Jove, I’ve got it!” cried Belmont. “He’s trying to speak English.
Tippy Tilly is as near as he can get to Egyptian Artillery. He has
served in the Egyptian Artillery under Bimbashi Mortimer. He was taken
prisoner when Hicks Pasha was destroyed, and had to turn Dervish to save
his skin. How’s that?”

The Colonel said a few words of Arabic and received a reply, but two of
the Arabs closed up, and the negro quickened his pace and left them.

“You are quite right,” said the Colonel. “The fellow is friendly to us,
and would rather fight for the Khedive than for the Khalifa. I don’t
know that he can do us any good, but I’ve been in worse holes than this,
and come out right side up. After all, we are not out of reach of
pursuit, and won’t be for another forty-eight hours.”

Belmont calculated the matter out in his slow, deliberate fashion.

“It was about twelve that we were on the rock,” said he. “They would
become alarmed aboard the steamer if we did not appear at two.”

“Yes,” the Colonel interrupted, “that was to be our lunch hour.
I remember saying that when I came back I would have--O Lord, it’s best
not to think of it!”

“The reis was a sleepy old crock,” Belmont continued, “but I have
absolute confidence in the promptness and decision of my wife.
She would insist upon an immediate alarm being given. Suppose they
started back at two-thirty, they should be at Halfa by three, since the
journey is down stream. How long did they say that it took to turn out
the Camel Corps?”

“Give them an hour.”

“And another hour to get them across the river. They would be at the
Abousir Rock and pick up the tracks by six o’clock. After that it is a
clear race. We are only four hours ahead, and some of these beasts are
very spent. We may be saved yet, Cochrane!”

“Some of us may. I don’t expect to see the padre alive to-morrow, nor
Miss Adams either. They are not made for this sort of thing either of
them. Then again we must not forget that these people have a trick of
murdering their prisoners when they see that there is a chance of a
rescue. See here, Belmont, in case you get back and I don’t, there’s a
matter of a mortgage that I want you to set right for me.” They rode on
with their shoulders inclined to each other, deep in the details of
business.

The friendly negro who had talked of himself as Tippy Tilly had managed
to slip a piece of cloth soaked in water into the hand of Mr. Stephens,
and Miss Adams had moistened her lips with it. Even the few drops had
given her renewed strength, and now that the first crushing shock was
over, her wiry, elastic, Yankee nature began to reassert itself.

“These people don’t look as if they would harm us, Mr. Stephens,” said
she. “I guess they have a working religion of their own, such as it is,
and that what’s wrong to us is wrong to them.”

Stephens shook his head in silence. He had seen the death of the
donkey-boys, and she had not.

“Maybe we are sent to guide them into a better path,” said the old lady.
“Maybe we are specially singled out for a good work among them.”

If it were not for her niece her energetic and enterprising temperament
was capable of glorying in the chance of evangelising Khartoum, and
turning Omdurman into a little well-drained broad-avenued replica of a
New England town.

“Do you know what I am thinking of all the time?” said Sadie.
“You remember that temple that we saw--when was it? Why, it was this
morning.”

They gave an exclamation of surprise, all three of them. Yes, it had
been this morning; and it seemed away and away in some dim past
experience of their lives, so vast was the change, so new and so
overpowering the thoughts which had come between. They rode in silence,
full of this strange expansion of time, until at last Stephens reminded
Sadie that she had left her remark unfinished.

“Oh yes; it was the wall picture on that temple that I was thinking of.
Do you remember the poor string of prisoners who are being dragged along
to the feet of the great king--how dejected they looked among the
warriors who led them? Who could--who _could_ have thought that within
three hours the same fate should be our own? And Mr. Headingly--”
She turned her face away and began to cry.

“Don’t take on, Sadie,” said her aunt; “remember what the minister said
just now, that we are all right there in the hollow of God’s hand.
Where do you think we are going, Mr. Stephens?”

The red edge of his Baedeker still projected from the lawyer’s pocket,
for it had not been worth their captor’s while to take it. He glanced
down at it.

“If they will only leave me this, I will look up a few references when
we halt. I have a general idea of the country, for I drew a small map
of it the other day. The river runs from south to north, so we must be
travelling almost due west. I suppose they feared pursuit if they kept
too near the Nile bank. There is a caravan route, I remember, which
runs parallel to the river, about seventy miles inland. If we continue
in this direction for a day we ought to come to it. There is a line of
wells through which it passes. It comes out at Assiout, if I remember
right, upon the Egyptian side. On the other side, it leads away into
the Dervish country--so, perhaps--”

His words were interrupted by a high, eager voice, which broke suddenly
into a torrent of jostling words, words without meaning, pouring
strenuously out in angry assertions and foolish repetitions. The pink
had deepened to scarlet upon Mr. Stuart’s cheeks, his eyes were vacant
but brilliant, and he gabbled, gabbled, gabbled as he rode.
Kindly mother Nature! she will not let her children be mishandled too
far. “This is too much,” she says; “this wounded leg, these crusted
lips, this anxious, weary mind. Come away for a time, until your body
becomes more habitable.” And so she coaxes the mind away into the
Nirvana of delirium, while the little cell-workers tinker and toil
within to get things better for its homecoming. When you see the veil
of cruelty which nature wears, try and peer through it, and you will
sometimes catch a glimpse of a very homely, kindly face behind.

The Arab guards looked askance at this sudden outbreak of the clergyman,
for it verged upon lunacy, and lunacy is to them a fearsome and
supernatural thing. One of them rode forward and spoke with the Emir.
When he returned he said something to his comrades, one of whom closed
in upon each side of the minister’s camel, so as to prevent him from
falling. The friendly negro sidled his beast up to the Colonel, and
whispered to him.

“We are going to halt presently, Belmont,” said Cochrane.

“Thank God! They may give us some water. We can’t go on like this.”

“I told Tippy Tilly that, if he could help us, we would turn him into a
Bimbashi when we got him back into Egypt. I think he’s willing enough
if he only had the power. By Jove, Belmont, do look back at the river.”

Their route, which had lain through sand-strewn khors with jagged, black
edges--places up which one would hardly think it possible that a camel
could climb--opened out now on to a hard, rolling plain, covered thickly
with rounded pebbles, dipping and rising to the violet hills upon the
horizon. So regular were the long, brown pebble-strewn curves, that
they looked like the dark rollers of some monstrous ground-swell. Here
and there a little straggling sage-green tuft of camel-grass sprouted up
between the stones. Brown plains and violet hills--nothing else in
front of them! Behind lay the black jagged rocks through which they had
passed with orange slopes of sand, and then far away a thin line of
green to mark the course of the river. How cool and beautiful that
green looked in the stark, abominable wilderness! On one side they
could see the high rock--the accursed rock which had tempted them to
their ruin. On the other the river curved, and the sun gleamed upon the
water. Oh, that liquid gleam, and the insurgent animal cravings, the
brutal primitive longings, which for the instant took the soul out of
all of them! They had lost families, countries, liberty, everything,
but it was only of water, water, water, that they could think. Mr.
Stuart in his delirium began roaring for oranges, and it was
insufferable for them to have to listen to him. Only the rough, sturdy
Irishman rose superior to that bodily craving. That gleam of river must
be somewhere near Halfa, and his wife might be upon the very water at
which he looked. He pulled his hat over his eyes, and rode in gloomy
silence, biting at his strong, iron-grey moustache.

Slowly the sun sank towards the west, and their shadows began to trail
along the path where their hearts would go. It was cooler, and a desert
breeze had sprung up, whispering over the rolling, stone-strewed plain.
The Emir at their head had called his lieutenant to his side, and the
pair had peered about, their eyes shaded by their hands, looking for
some landmark. Then, with a satisfied grunt, the chief’s camel had
seemed to break short off at its knees, and then at its hocks, going
down in three curious, broken-jointed jerks until its stomach was
stretched upon the ground. As each succeeding camel reached the spot it
lay down also, until they were all stretched in one long line.
The riders sprang off, and laid out the chopped tibbin upon cloths in
front of them, for no well-bred camel will eat from the ground.
In their gentle eyes, their quiet, leisurely way of eating, and their
condescending, mincing manner, there was something both feminine and
genteel, as though a party of prim old maids had foregathered in the
heart of the Libyan Desert.

There was no interference with the prisoners, either male or female, for
how could they escape in the centre of that huge plain? The Emir came
towards them once, and stood combing out his blue-black beard with his
fingers, and looking thoughtfully at them out of his dark, sinister
eyes. Miss Adams saw with a shudder that it was always upon Sadie that
his gaze was fixed. Then, seeing their distress, he gave an order, and
a negro brought a water-skin, from which he gave each of them about half
a tumblerful. It was hot and muddy, and tasted of leather, but oh how
delightful it was to their parched palates! The Emir said a few abrupt
words to the dragoman, and left.

“Ladies and gentlemen,” Mansoor began, with something of his old
consequential manner; but a glare from the Colonel’s eyes struck the
words from his lips, and he broke away into a long, whimpering excuse
for his conduct.

“How could I do anything otherwise,” he wailed, “with the very knife at
my throat?”

“You will have the very rope round your throat if we all see Egypt
again,” growled Cochrane savagely. “In the meantime--”

“That’s all right, Colonel,” said Belmont. “But for our own sakes we
ought to know what the chief has said.”

“For my part I’ll have nothing to do with the blackguard.”

“I think that that is going too far. We are bound to hear what he has
to say.” Cochrane shrugged his shoulders. Privations had made him
irritable, and he had to bite his lip to keep down a bitter answer.
He walked slowly away, with his straight-legged military stride.

“What did he say, then?” asked Belmont, looking at the dragoman with an
eye which was as stern as the Colonel’s.

“He seems to be in a somewhat better manner than before. He said that
if he had more water you should have it, but that he is himself short in
supply. He said that to-morrow we shall come to the wells of Selimah,
and everybody shall have plenty--and the camels too.”

“Did he say how long we stopped here?”

“Very little rest, he said, and then forward! Oh, Mr. Belmont--”

“Hold your tongue!” snapped the Irishman, and began once more to count
times and distances. If it all worked out as he expected, if his wife
had insisted upon the indolent reis giving an instant alarm at Halfa,
then the pursuers should be already upon their track. The Camel Corps
or the Egyptian Horse would travel by moonlight better and faster than
in the day-time. He knew that it was the custom at Halfa to keep at
least a squadron of them all ready to start at any instant. He had
dined at the mess, and the officers had told him how quickly they could
take the field. They had shown him the water-tanks and the food beside
each of the beasts, and he had admired the completeness of the
arrangements, with little thought as to what it might mean to him in the
future. It would be at least an hour before they would all get started
again from their present halting-place. That would be a clear hour
gained. Perhaps by next morning--

And then, suddenly, his thoughts were terribly interrupted.
The Colonel, raving like a madman, appeared upon the crest of the
nearest slope, with an Arab hanging on to each of his wrists. His face
was purple with rage and excitement, and he tugged and bent and writhed
in his furious efforts to get free. “You cursed murderers!” he
shrieked, and then, seeing the others in front of him, “Belmont,” he
cried, “they’ve killed Cecil Brown.”

What had happened was this. In his conflict with his own ill-humour,
Cochrane had strolled over this nearest crest, and had found a group of
camels in the hollow beyond, with a little knot of angry, loud-voiced
men beside them. Brown was the centre of the group, pale, heavy-eyed,
with his upturned, spiky moustache and listless manner. They had
searched his pockets before, but now they were determined to tear off
all his clothes in the hope of finding something which he had secreted.
A hideous negro with silver bangles in his ears, grinned and jabbered in
the young diplomatist’s impassive face. There seemed to the Colonel to
be something heroic and almost inhuman in that white calm, and those
abstracted eyes. His coat was already open, and the Negro’s great black
paw flew up to his neck and tore his shirt down to the waist. And at
the sound of that r-r-rip, and at the abhorrent touch of those coarse
fingers, this man about town, this finished product of the nineteenth
century, dropped his life-traditions and became a savage facing a
savage. His face flushed, his lips curled back, he chattered his teeth
like an ape, and his eyes--those indolent eyes which had always twinkled
so placidly--were gorged and frantic. He threw himself upon the negro,
and struck him again and again, feebly but viciously, in his broad,
black face. He hit like a girl, round arm, with an open palm. The man
winced away for an instant, appalled by this sudden blaze of passion.
Then with an impatient, snarling cry, he slid a knife from his long
loose sleeve and struck upwards under the whirling arm. Brown sat down
at the blow and began to cough--to cough as a man coughs who has choked
at dinner, furiously, ceaselessly, spasm after spasm. Then the angry
red cheeks turned to a mottled pallor, there were liquid sounds in his
throat, and, clapping his hand to his mouth, he rolled over on to his
side. The negro, with a brutal grunt of contempt, slid his knife up his
sleeve once more, while the Colonel, frantic with impotent anger, was
seized by the bystanders, and dragged, raving with fury, back to his
forlorn party. His hands were lashed with a camel-halter, and he lay at
last, in bitter silence, beside the delirious Nonconformist.

So Headingly was gone, and Cecil Brown was gone, and their haggard eyes
were turned from one pale face to another, to know which they should
lose next of that frieze of light-hearted riders who had stood out so
clearly against the blue morning sky, when viewed from the deck-chairs
of the _Korosko_. Two gone out of ten, and a third out of his mind.
The pleasure trip was drawing to its climax.

Fardet, the Frenchman, was sitting alone with his chin resting upon his
hands, and his elbows upon his knees, staring miserably out over the
desert, when Belmont saw him start suddenly and prick up his head like a
dog who hears a strange step. Then, with clenched fingers, he bent his
face forward and stared fixedly towards the black eastern hills through
which they had passed. Belmont followed his gaze, and, yes-yes--there
was something moving there! He saw the twinkle of metal, and the sudden
gleam and flutter of some white garment. A Dervish vedette upon the
flank turned his camel twice round as a danger signal, and discharged
his rifle in the air. The echo of the crack had hardly died away before
they were all in their saddles, Arabs and negroes. Another instant, and
the camels were on their feet and moving slowly towards the point of
alarm. Several armed men surrounded the prisoners, slipping cartridges
into their Remingtons as a hint to them to remain still.

“By Heaven, they are men on camels!” cried Cochrane, his troubles all
forgotten as he strained his eyes to catch sight of these new-comers.
“I do believe that it is our own people.” In the confusion he had tugged
his hands free from the halter which bound them.

“They’ve been smarter than I gave them credit for,” said Belmont, his
eyes shining from under his thick brows. “They are here a long two
hours before we could have reasonably expected them. Hurrah, Monsieur
Fardet, _ça va bien, n’est ce pas?_”

“Hurrah, hurrah! _merveilleusement bien! Vivent les Anglais! Vivent
les Anglais!_” yelled the excited Frenchman, as the head of a column of
camelry began to wind out from among the rocks.

“See here, Belmont,” cried the Colonel. “These fellows will want to
shoot us if they see it is all up. I know their ways, and we must be
ready for it. Will you be ready to jump on the fellow with the blind
eye? and I’ll take the big nigger, if I can get my arms round him.
Stephens, you must do what you can. You, Fardet, _comprenez vous?
Il est necessaire_ to plug these Johnnies before they can hurt us.
You, dragoman, tell those two Soudanese soldiers that they must be
ready--but, but” ... his words died into a murmur, and he swallowed
once or twice. “These are Arabs,” said he, and it sounded like another
voice.

Of all the bitter day, it was the very bitterest moment. Happy Mr.
Stuart lay upon the pebbles with his back against the ribs of his camel,
and chuckled consumedly at some joke which those busy little
cell-workers had come across in their repairs. His fat face was
wreathed and creased with merriment. But the others, how sick, how
heart-sick, were they all! The women cried. The men turned away in
that silence which is beyond tears. Monsieur Fardet fell upon his face,
and shook with dry sobbings.

The Arabs were firing their rifles as a welcome to their friends, and
the others as they trotted their camels across the open returned the
salutes and waved their rifles and lances in the air. They were a
smaller band than the first one--not more than thirty--but dressed in
the same red headgear and patched jibbehs. One of them carried a small
white banner with a scarlet text scrawled across it. But there was
something there which drew the eyes and the thoughts of the tourists
away from everything else. The same fear gripped at each of their
hearts, and the same impulse kept each of them silent. They stared at a
swaying white figure half seen amidst the ranks of the desert warriors.

“What’s that they have in the middle of them?” cried Stephens at last.
“Look, Miss Adams! Surely it is a woman!”

There was something there upon a camel, but it was difficult to catch a
glimpse of it. And then suddenly, as the two bodies met, the riders
opened out, and they saw it plainly.

“It’s a white woman!”

“The steamer has been taken!”

Belmont gave a cry that sounded high above everything.

“Norah, darling,” he shouted, “keep your heart up! I’m here, and it is
all well!”




CHAPTER VI.


So the _Korosko_ had been taken, and the chances of rescue upon which
they had reckoned--all those elaborate calculations of hours and
distances--were as unsubstantial as the mirage which shimmered upon the
horizon. There would be no alarm at Halfa until it was found that the
steamer did not return in the evening. Even now, when the Nile was only
a thin green band upon the farthest horizon, the pursuit had probably
not begun. In a hundred miles, or even less, they would be in the
Dervish country. How small, then, was the chance that the Egyptian
forces could overtake them. They all sank into a silent, sulky despair,
with the exception of Belmont, who was held back by the guards as he
strove to go to his wife’s assistance.

The two bodies of camel-men had united, and the Arabs, in their grave,
dignified fashion, were exchanging salutations and experiences, while
the negroes grinned, chattered, and shouted, with the careless
good-humour which even the Koran has not been able to alter. The leader
of the new-comers was a greybeard, a worn, ascetic, high-nosed old man,
abrupt and fierce in his manner, and soldierly in his bearing.
The dragoman groaned when he saw him, and flapped his hands miserably
with the air of a man who sees trouble accumulating upon trouble.

“It is the Emir Abderrahman,” said he. “I fear now that we shall never
come to Khartoum alive.”

The name meant nothing to the others, but Colonel Cochrane had heard of
him as a monster of cruelty and fanaticism, a red-hot Moslem of the old
fighting, preaching dispensation, who never hesitated to carry the
fierce doctrines of the Koran to their final conclusions. He and the
Emir Wad Ibrahim conferred gravely together, their camels side by side,
and their red turbans inclined inwards, so that the black beard mingled
with the white one. Then they both turned and stared long and fixedly
at the poor, head-hanging huddle of prisoners. The younger man pointed
and explained, while his senior listened with a sternly impassive face.

“Who’s that nice-looking old gentleman in the white beard?” asked Miss
Adams, who had been the first to rally from the bitter disappointment.

“That is their leader now,” Cochrane answered.

“You don’t say that he takes command over that other one?”

“Yes, lady,” said the dragoman; “he is now the head of all.”

“Well, that’s good for us. He puts me in mind of Elder Mathews who was
at the Presbyterian Church in Minister Scott’s time. Anyhow, I had
rather be in his power than in the hands of that black-haired one with
the flint eyes. Sadie, dear, you feel better now its cooler, don’t
you?”

“Yes, auntie; don’t you fret about me. How are you yourself?”

“Well, I’m stronger in faith than I was. I set you a poor example,
Sadie, for I was clean crazed at first at the suddenness of it all, and
at thinking of what your mother, who trusted you to me, would think
about it. My land, there’ll be some head-lines in the _Boston Herald_
over this! I guess somebody will have to suffer for it.”

“Poor Mr. Stuart!” cried Sadie, as the monotonous droning voice of the
delirious man came again to their ears. “Come, auntie, and see if we
cannot do something to relieve him.”

“I’m uneasy about Mrs. Shlesinger and the child,” said Colonel Cochrane.
“I can see your wife, Belmont, but I can see no one else.”

“They are bringing her over,” cried he. “Thank God! We shall hear all
about it. They haven’t hurt you, Norah, have they?” He ran forward to
grasp and kiss the hand which his wife held down to him as he helped her
from the camel.

The kind grey eyes and calm sweet face of the Irishwoman brought comfort
and hope to the whole party. She was a devout Roman Catholic, and it is
a creed which forms an excellent prop in hours of danger. To her, to
the Anglican Colonel, to the Nonconformist minister, to the Presbyterian
American, even to the two Pagan black riflemen, religion in its various
forms was fulfilling the same beneficent office--whispering always that
the worst which the world can do is a small thing, and that, however
harsh the ways of Providence may seem, it is, on the whole, the wisest
and best thing for us that we should go cheerfully whither the Great
Hand guides us. They had not a dogma in common, these fellows in
misfortune; but they held the intimate, deep-lying spirit, the calm,
essential fatalism which is the world-old framework of religion, with
fresh crops of dogmas growing like ephemeral lichens upon its granite
surface.

“You poor things!” she said. “I can see that you have had a much worse
time than I have. No, really, John, dear, I am quite well--not even
very thirsty, for our party filled their water-skins at the Nile, and
they let me have as much as I wanted. But I don’t see Mr. Headingly and
Mr. Brown. And poor Mr. Stuart--what a state he has been reduced to!”

“Headingly and Brown are out of their troubles,” her husband answered.
“You don’t know how often I have thanked God to-day, Norah, that you
were not with us. And here you are, after all.”

“Where should I be but by my husband’s side? I had much, _much_ rather
be here than safe at Halfa.”

“Has any news gone to the town?” asked the Colonel.

“One boat escaped. Mrs. Shlesinger and her child and maid were in it.
I was downstairs in my cabin when the Arabs rushed on to the vessel.
Those on deck had time to escape, for the boat was alongside. I don’t
know whether any of them were hit. The Arabs fired at them for some
time.”

“Did they?” cried Belmont exultantly, his responsive Irish nature
catching the sunshine in an instant. “Then, be Jove, we’ll do them yet,
for the garrison must have heard the firing. What d’ye think, Cochrane?
They must be full cry upon our scent this four hours. Any minute we
might see the white puggaree of a British officer coming over that
rise.”

But disappointment had left the Colonel cold and sceptical.

“They need not come at all unless they come strong,” said he.
“These fellows are picked men with good leaders, and on their own ground
they will take a lot of beating.” Suddenly he paused and looked at the
Arabs. “By George!” said he, “that’s a sight worth seeing!”

The great red sun was down with half its disc slipped behind the violet
bank upon the horizon. It was the hour of Arab prayer. An older and
more learned civilisation would have turned to that magnificent thing
upon the skyline and adored _that_. But these wild children of the
desert were nobler in essentials than the polished Persian. To them the
ideal was higher than the material, and it was with their backs to the
sun and their faces to the central shrine of their religion that they
prayed. And how they prayed, these fanatical Moslems! Rapt, absorbed,
with yearning eyes and shining faces, rising, stooping, grovelling with
their foreheads upon their praying carpets. Who could doubt, as he
watched their strenuous, heart-whole devotion, that here was a great
living power in the world, reactionary but tremendous, countless
millions all thinking as one from Cape Juby to the confines of China?
Let a common wave pass over them, let a great soldier or organiser arise
among them to use the grand material at his hand, and who shall say that
this may not be the besom with which Providence may sweep the rotten,
decadent, impossible, half-hearted south of Europe, as it did a thousand
years ago, until it makes room for a sounder stock?

And now as they rose to their feet the bugle rang out, and the prisoners
understood that, having travelled all day, they were fated to travel all
night also. Belmont groaned, for he had reckoned upon the pursuers
catching them up before they left this camp. But the others had already
got into the way of accepting the inevitable. A flat Arab loaf had been
given to each of them--what effort of the _chef_ of the post-boat had
ever tasted like that dry brown bread?--and then, luxury of luxuries,
they had a second ration of a glass of water, for the fresh-filled bags
of the newcomers had provided an ample supply. If the body would but
follow the lead of the soul as readily as the soul does that of the
body, what a heaven the earth might be! Now, with their base material
wants satisfied for the instant, their spirits began to sing within
them, and they mounted their camels with some sense of the romance of
their position. Mr. Stuart remained babbling upon the ground, and the
Arabs made no effort to lift him into his saddle. His large, white,
upturned face glimmered through the gathering darkness.

“Hi, dragoman, tell them that they are forgetting Mr. Stuart,” cried the
Colonel.

“No use, sir,” said Mansoor. “They say that he is too fat, and that
they will not take him any farther. He will die, they say, and why
should they trouble about him?”

“Not take him!” cried Cochrane. “Why, the man will perish of hunger and
thirst. Where’s the Emir? Hi!” he shouted, as the black-bearded Arab
passed, with a tone like that in which he used to summon a dilatory
donkey-boy. The chief did not deign to answer him, but said something
to one of the guards, who dashed the butt of his Remington into the
Colonel’s ribs. The old soldier fell forward gasping, and was carried
on half senseless, clutching at the pommel of his saddle. The women
began to cry, and the men, with muttered curses and clenched hands,
writhed in that hell of impotent passion, where brutal injustice and
ill-usage have to go without check or even remonstrance. Belmont
gripped at his hip-pocket for his little revolver, and then remembered
that he had already given it to Miss Adams. If his hot hand had
clutched it, it would have meant the death of the Emir and the massacre
of the party.

And now as they rode onwards they saw one of the most singular of the
phenomena of the Egyptian desert in front of them, though the
ill-treatment of their companion had left them in no humour for the
appreciation of its beauty. When the sun had sunk, the horizon had
remained of a slaty-violet hue. But now this began to lighten and to
brighten until a curious false dawn developed, and it seemed as if a
vacillating sun was coming back along the path which it had just
abandoned. A rosy pink hung over the west, with beautifully delicate
sea-green tints along the upper edge of it. Slowly these faded into
slate again, and the night had come. It was but twenty-four hours since
they had sat in their canvas chairs discussing politics by starlight on
the saloon deck of the _Korosko_; only twelve since they had breakfasted
there and had started spruce and fresh upon their last pleasure trip.
What a world of fresh impressions had come upon them since then!
How rudely they had been jostled out of their take-it-for-granted
complacency! The same shimmering silver stars, as they had looked upon
last night, the same thin crescent of moon--but they, what a chasm lay
between that old pampered life and this!

The long line of camels moved as noiselessly as ghosts across the
desert. Before and behind were the silent, swaying white figures of the
Arabs. Not a sound anywhere, not the very faintest sound, until far
away behind them they heard a human voice singing in a strong, droning,
unmusical fashion. It had the strangest effect, this far-away voice, in
that huge inarticulate wilderness. And then there came a well-known
rhythm into that distant chant, and they could almost hear the words--

    We nightly pitch our moving tent,
    A day’s march nearer home.

Was Mr. Stuart in his right mind again, or was it some coincidence of
his delirium, that he should have chosen this for his song? With moist
eyes his friends looked back through the darkness, for well they knew
that home was very near to this wanderer. Gradually the voice died away
into a hum, and was absorbed once more into the masterful silence of the
desert.

“My dear old chap, I hope you’re not hurt?” said Belmont, laying his
hand upon Cochrane’s knee.

The Colonel had straightened himself, though he still gasped a little in
his breathing.

“I am all right again, now. Would you kindly show me which was the man
who struck me?”

“It was the fellow in front there--with his camel beside Fardet’s.”

“The young fellow with the moustache--I can’t see him very well in this
light, but I think I could pick him out again. Thank you, Belmont!”

“But I thought some of your ribs were gone.”

“No, it only knocked the wind out of me.”

“You must be made of iron. It was a frightful blow. How could you
rally from it so quickly?”

The Colonel cleared his throat and hummed and stammered.

“The fact is, my dear Belmont--I’m sure you would not let it go
further--above all not to the ladies; but I am rather older than I used
to be, and rather than lose the military carriage which has always been
dear to me, I--”

“Stays, be Jove!” cried the astonished Irishman.

“Well, some slight artificial support,” said the Colonel stiffly, and
switched the conversation off to the chances of the morrow.

It still comes back in their dreams to those who are left, that long
night’s march in the desert. It was like a dream itself, the silence of
it as they were borne forward upon those soft, shuffling sponge feet,
and the flitting, flickering figures which oscillated upon every side of
them. The whole universe seemed to be hung as a monstrous time-dial in
front of them. A star would glimmer like a lantern on the very level of
their path. They looked again, and it was a hand’s-breadth up, and
another was shining beneath it. Hour after hour the broad stream flowed
sedately across the deep blue background, worlds and systems drifting
majestically overhead, and pouring over the dark horizon. In their
vastness and their beauty there was a vague consolation to the
prisoners; for their own fate, and their own individuality, seemed
trivial and unimportant amid the play of such tremendous forces.
Slowly the grand procession swept across the heaven, first climbing,
then hanging long with little apparent motion, and then sinking grandly
downwards, until away in the east the first cold grey glimmer appeared,
and their own haggard faces shocked each other’s sight.

The day had tortured them with its heat, and now the night had brought
the even more intolerable discomfort of cold. The Arabs swathed
themselves in their gowns and wrapped up their heads. The prisoners
beat their hands together and shivered miserably. Miss Adams felt it
most, for she was very thin, with the impaired circulation of age.
Stephens slipped off his Norfolk jacket and threw it over her shoulders.
He rode beside Sadie, and whistled and chatted to make her believe that
her aunt was really relieving him by carrying his jacket for him, but
the attempt was too boisterous not to be obvious; and yet it was so far
true that he probably felt the cold less than any of the party, for the
old, old fire was burning in his heart, and a curious joy was
inextricably mixed with all his misfortunes, so that he would have found
it hard to say if this adventure had been the greatest evil or the
greatest blessing of his lifetime. Aboard the boat, Sadie’s youth, her
beauty, her intelligence and humour, all made him realise that she could
at the best only be expected to charitably endure him. But now he felt
that he was really of some use to her, that every hour she was learning
to turn to him as one turns to one’s natural protector; and above all,
he had begun to find himself--to understand that there really was a
strong, reliable man behind all the tricks of custom which had built up
an artificial nature, which had imposed even upon himself. A little
glow of self-respect began to warm his blood. He had missed his youth
when he was young, and now in his middle age it was coming up like some
beautiful belated flower.

“I do believe that you are all the time enjoying it, Mr. Stephens,” said
Sadie with some bitterness.

“I would not go so far as to say that,” he answered. “But I am quite
certain that I would not leave you here.”

It was the nearest approach to tenderness which he had ever put into a
speech, and the girl looked at him in surprise.

“I think I’ve been a very wicked girl all my life,” she said after a
pause. “Because I have had a good time myself, I never thought of those
who were unhappy. This has struck me serious. If ever I get back I
shall be a better woman--a more earnest woman--in the future.”

“And I a better man. I suppose it is just for that that trouble comes
to us. Look how it has brought out the virtues of all our friends.
Take poor Mr. Stuart, for example. Should we ever have known what a
noble, constant man he was? And see Belmont and his wife, in front of
us there, going fearlessly forward, hand in hand, thinking only of each
other. And Cochrane, who always seemed on board the boat to be a rather
stand-offish, narrow sort of man! Look at his courage, and his
unselfish indignation when any one is ill used. Fardet, too, is as
brave as a lion. I think misfortune has done us all good.”

Sadie sighed.

“Yes, if it would end right here one might say so; but if it goes on and
on for a few weeks or months of misery, and then ends in death, I don’t
know where we reap the benefit of those improvements of character which
it brings. Suppose you escape, what will you do?”

The lawyer hesitated, but his professional instincts were still strong.

“I will consider whether an action lies, and against whom. It should be
with the organisers of the expedition for taking us to the Abousir
Rock--or else with the Egyptian Government for not protecting their
frontiers. It will be a nice legal question. And what will you do,
Sadie?”

It was the first time that he had ever dropped the formal Miss, but the
girl was too much in earnest to notice it.

“I will be more tender to others,” she said. “I will try to make some
one else happy in memory of the miseries which I have endured.”

“You have done nothing all your life but made others happy. You cannot
help doing it,” said he. The darkness made it more easy for him to
break through the reserve which was habitual with him. “You need this
rough schooling far less than any of us. How could your character be
changed for the better?”

“You show how little you know me. I have been very selfish and
thoughtless.”

“At least you had no need for all these strong emotions. You were
sufficiently alive without them. Now it has been different with me.”

“Why did you need emotions, Mr. Stephens?”

“Because anything is better than stagnation. Pain is better than
stagnation. I have only just begun to live. Hitherto I have been a
machine upon the earth’s surface. I was a one-ideaed man, and a
one-ideaed man is only one remove from a dead man. That is what I have
only just begun to realise. For all these years I have never been
stirred, never felt a real throb of human emotion pass through me.
I had no time for it. I had observed it in others, and I had vaguely
wondered whether there was some want in me which prevented my sharing
the experience of my fellow-mortals. But now these last few days have
taught me how keenly I can live--that I can have warm hopes, and deadly
fears--that I can hate, and that I can--well, that I can have every
strong feeling which the soul can experience. I have come to life. I
may be on the brink of the grave, but at least I can say now that I have
lived.”

“And why did you lead this soul-killing life in England?”

“I was ambitious--I wanted to get on. And then there were my mother and
my sisters to be thought of. Thank Heaven, here is the morning coming.
Your aunt and you will soon cease to feel the cold.”

“And you without your coat!”

“Oh, I have a very good circulation. I can manage very well in my
shirt-sleeves.”

And now the long, cold, weary night was over, and the deep blue-black
sky had lightened to a wonderful mauve-violet, with the larger stars
still glinting brightly out of it. Behind them the grey line had crept
higher and higher, deepening into a delicate rose-pink, with the
fan-like rays of the invisible sun shooting and quivering across it.
Then, suddenly, they felt its warm touch upon their backs, and there
were hard black shadows upon the sand in front of them. The Dervishes
loosened their cloaks and proceeded to talk cheerily among themselves.
The prisoners also began to thaw, and eagerly ate the doora which was
served out for their breakfasts. A short halt had been called, and a
cup of water handed to each.

“Can I speak to you, Colonel Cochrane?” asked the dragoman.

“No, you can’t,” snapped the Colonel.

“But it is very important--all our safety may come from it.”

The Colonel frowned and pulled at his moustache.

“Well, what is it?” he asked at last.

“You must trust to me, for it is as much to me as to you to get back to
Egypt. My wife and home, and children, are on one part, and a slave for
life upon the other. You have no cause to doubt it.”

“Well, go on!”

“You know the black man who spoke with you--the one who had been with
Hicks?”

“Yes, what of him?”

“He has been speaking with me during the night. I have had a long talk
with him. He said that he could not very well understand you, nor you
him, and so he came to me.”

“What did he say?”

“He said that there were eight Egyptian soldiers among the Arabs--six
black and two fellaheen. He said that he wished to have your promise
that they should all have very good reward if they helped you to
escape.”

“Of course they shall.”

“They asked for one hundred Egyptian pounds each.”

“They shall have it.”

“I told him that I would ask you, but that I was sure that you would
agree to it.”

“What do they propose to do?”

“They could promise nothing, but what they thought best was that they
should ride their camels not very far from you, so that if any chance
should come they would be ready to take advantage.”

“Well, you can go to him and promise two hundred pounds each if they
will help us. You do not think we could buy over some Arabs?”

Mansoor shook his head. “Too much danger to try,” said he.
“Suppose you try and fail, then that will be the end to all of us.
I will go tell what you have said.” He strolled off to where the old
negro gunner was grooming his camel and waiting for his reply.

The Emirs had intended to halt for a half-hour at the most, but the
baggage-camels which bore the prisoners were so worn out with the long,
rapid march, that it was clearly impossible that they should move for
some time. They had laid their long necks upon the ground, which is the
last symptom of fatigue. The two chiefs shook their heads when they
inspected them, and the terrible old man looked with his hard-lined,
rock features at the captives. Then he said something to Mansoor, whose
face turned a shade more sallow as he listened.

“The Emir Abderrahman says that if you do not become Moslem, it is not
worth while delaying the whole caravan in order to carry you upon the
baggage-camels. If it were not for you, he says that we could travel
twice as fast. He wishes to know therefore, once for ever, if you will
accept the Koran.” Then in the same tone, as if he were still
translating, he continued: “You had far better consent, for if you do
not he will most certainly put you all to death.”

The unhappy prisoners looked at each other in despair. The two Emirs
stood gravely watching them.

“For my part,” said Cochrane, “I had as soon die now as be a slave in
Khartoum.”

“What do you say, Norah?” asked Belmont.

“If we die together, John, I don’t think I shall be afraid.”

“It is absurd that I should die for that in which I have never had
belief,” said Fardet. “And yet it is not possible for the honour of a
Frenchman that he should be converted in this fashion.” He drew himself
up, with his wounded wrist stuck into the front of his jacket, “_Je suis
Chretien. J’y reste,_” he cried, a gallant falsehood in each sentence.

“What do you say, Mr. Stephens?” asked Mansoor in a beseeching voice.
“If one of you would change, it might place them in a good humour.
I implore you that you do what they ask.”

“No, I can’t,” said the lawyer quietly.

“Well then, you, Miss Sadie? You, Miss Adams? It is only just to say
it once, and you will be saved.”

“Oh, auntie, do you think we might?” whimpered the frightened girl.
“Would it be so very wrong if we said it?”

The old lady threw her arms round her. “No, no, my own dear little
Sadie,” she whispered. “You’ll be strong! You would just hate yourself
for ever after. Keep your grip of me, dear, and pray if you find your
strength is leaving you. Don’t forget that your old aunt Eliza has you
all the time by the hand.”

For an instant they were heroic, this line of dishevelled, bedraggled
pleasure-seekers. They were all looking Death in the face, and the
closer they looked the less they feared him. They were conscious rather
of a feeling of curiosity, together with the nervous tingling with which
one approaches a dentist’s chair. The dragoman made a motion of his
hands and shoulders, as one who has tried and failed. The Emir
Abderrahman said something to a negro, who hurried away.

“What does he want a scissors for?” asked the Colonel.

“He is going to hurt the women,” said Mansoor, with the same gesture of
impotence.

A cold chill fell upon them all. They stared about them in helpless
horror. Death in the abstract was one thing, but these insufferable
details were another. Each had been braced to endure any evil in his
own person, but their hearts were still soft for each other. The women
said nothing, but the men were all buzzing together.

“There’s the pistol, Miss Adams,” said Belmont. “Give it here!
We won’t be tortured! We won’t stand it!”

“Offer them money, Mansoor! Offer them anything!” cried Stephens.
“Look here, I’ll turn Mohammedan if they’ll promise to leave the women
alone. After all, it isn’t binding--it’s under compulsion. But I can’t
see the women hurt.”

“No, wait a bit, Stephens!” said the Colonel. “We mustn’t lose our
heads. I think I see a way out. See here, dragoman! You tell that
grey-bearded old devil that we know nothing about his cursed tinpot
religion. Put it smooth when you translate it. Tell him that he cannot
expect us to adopt it until we know what particular brand of rot it is
that he wants us to believe. Tell him that if he will instruct us, we
are perfectly willing to listen to his teaching, and you can add that
any creed which turns out such beauties as him, and that other bounder
with the black beard, must claim the attention of every one.”

With bows and suppliant sweepings of his hands the dragoman explained
that the Christians were already full of doubt, and that it needed but a
little more light of knowledge to guide them on to the path of Allah.
The two Emirs stroked their beards and gazed suspiciously at them.
Then Abderrahman spoke in his crisp, stern fashion to the dragoman, and
the two strode away together. An instant later the bugle rang out as a
signal to mount.

“What he says is this,” Mansoor explained, as he rode in the middle of
the prisoners. “We shall reach the wells by mid-day, and there will be
a rest. His own Moolah, a very good and learned man, will come to give
you an hour of teaching. At the end of that time you will choose one
way or the other. When you have chosen, it will be decided whether you
are to go to Khartoum or to be put to death. That is his last word.”

“They won’t take ransom?”

“Wad Ibrahim would, but the Emir Abderrahman is a terrible man.
I advise you to give in to him.”

“What have you done yourself? You are a Christian, too.”

Mansoor blushed as deeply as his complexion would allow.

“I was yesterday morning. Perhaps I will be to-morrow morning. I serve
the Lord as long as what He ask seem reasonable; but this is very
otherwise.”

He rode onwards amongst the guards with a freedom which showed that his
change of faith had put him upon a very different footing to the other
prisoners.

So they were to have a reprieve of a few hours, though they rode in that
dark shadow of death which was closing in upon them. What is there in
life that we should cling to it so? It is not the pleasures, for those
whose hours are one long pain shrink away screaming when they see
merciful Death holding his soothing arms out for them. It is not the
associations, for we will change all of them before we walk of our own
free-wills down that broad road which every son and daughter of man must
tread. Is it the fear of losing the I, that dear, intimate I, which we
think we know so well, although it is eternally doing things which
surprise us? Is it that which makes the deliberate suicide cling madly
to the bridge-pier as the river sweeps him by? Or is it that Nature is
so afraid that all her weary workmen may suddenly throw down their tools
and strike, that she has invented this fashion of keeping them constant
to their present work? But there it is, and all these tired, harassed,
humiliated folk rejoiced in the few more hours of suffering which were
left to them.




CHAPTER VII.


There was nothing to show them as they journeyed onwards that they were
not on the very spot that they had passed at sunset upon the evening
before. The region of fantastic black hills and orange sand which
bordered the river had long been left behind, and everywhere now was the
same brown, rolling, gravelly plain, the ground-swell with the shining
rounded pebbles upon its surface, and the occasional little sprouts of
sage-green camel-grass. Behind and before it extended, to where far
away in front of them it sloped upwards towards a line of violet hills.
The sun was not high enough yet to cause the tropical shimmer, and the
wide landscape, brown with its violet edging, stood out with a hard
clearness in that dry, pure air. The long caravan straggled along at
the slow swing of the baggage-camels. Far out on the flanks rode the
vedettes, halting at every rise, and peering backwards with their hands
shading their eyes. In the distance their spears and rifles seemed to
stick out of them, straight and thin, like needles in knitting.

“How far do you suppose we are from the Nile?” asked Cochrane. He rode
with his chin on his shoulder and his eyes straining wistfully to the
eastern skyline.

“A good fifty miles,” Belmont answered.

“Not so much as that,” said the Colonel. “We could not have been moving
more than fifteen or sixteen hours, and a camel does not do more than
two and a half miles an hour unless it is trotting. That would only
give about forty miles, but still it is, I fear, rather far for a
rescue. I don’t know that we are much the better for this postponement.
What have we to hope for? We may just as well take our gruel.”

“Never say die!” cried the cheery Irishman. “There’s plenty of time
between this and mid-day. Hamilton and Hedley of the Camel Corps are
good boys, and they’ll be after us like a streak. They’ll have no
baggage-camels to hold them back, you can lay your life on that! Little
did I think, when I dined with them at mess that last night, and they
were telling me all their precautions against a raid, that I should
depend upon them for our lives.”

“Well, we’ll play the game out, but I’m not very hopeful,” said
Cochrane. “Of course, we must keep the best face we can before the
women. I see that Tippy Tilly is as good as his word, for those five
niggers and the two brown Johnnies must be the men he speaks of.
They all ride together and keep well up, but I can’t see how they are
going to help us.”

“I’ve got my pistol back,” whispered Belmont, and his square chin and
strong mouth set like granite. “If they try any games on the women, I
mean to shoot them all three with my own hand, and then we’ll die with
our minds easy.”

“Good man!” said Cochrane, and they rode on in silence. None of them
spoke much. A curious, dreamy, irresponsible feeling crept over them.
It was as if they had all taken some narcotic drug--the merciful anodyne
which Nature uses when a great crisis has fretted the nerves too far.
They thought of their friends and of their past lives in the
comprehensive way in which one views that which is completed. A subtle
sweetness mingled with the sadness of their fate. They were filled with
the quiet serenity of despair.

“It’s devilish pretty,” said the Colonel, looking about him. “I always
had an idea that I should like to die in a real, good, yellow London
fog. You couldn’t change for the worse.”

“I should have liked to have died in my sleep,” said Sadie.
“How beautiful to wake up and find yourself in the other world!
There was a piece that Hetty Smith used to say at the College: ‘Say not
good-night, but in some brighter world wish me good-morning.’”

The Puritan aunt shook her head at the idea. “It’s a terrible thing to
go unprepared into the presence of your Maker,” said she.

“It’s the loneliness of death that is terrible,” said Mrs. Belmont.
“If we and those whom we loved all passed over simultaneously, we should
think no more of it than of changing our house.”

“If the worst comes to the worst, we won’t be lonely,” said her husband.
“We’ll all go together, and we shall find Brown and Headingly and Stuart
waiting on the other side.”

The Frenchman shrugged his shoulders. He had no belief in survival
after death, but he envied the two Catholics the quiet way in which they
took things for granted. He chuckled to think of what his friends in
the Café Cubat would say if they learned that he had laid down his life
for the Christian faith. Sometimes it amused and sometimes it maddened
him, and he rode onwards with alternate gusts of laughter and of fury,
nursing his wounded wrist all the time like a mother with a sick baby.

Across the brown of the hard, pebbly desert there had been visible for
some time a single long, thin, yellow streak, extending north and south
as far as they could see. It was a band of sand not more than a few
hundred yards across, and rising at the highest to eight or ten feet.
But the prisoners were astonished to observe that the Arabs pointed at
this with an air of the utmost concern, and they halted when they came
to the edge of it like men upon the brink of an unfordable river.
It was very light, dusty sand, and every wandering breath of wind sent
it dancing into the air like a whirl of midges. The Emir Abderrahman
tried to force his camel into it, but the creature, after a step or two,
stood still and shivered with terror. The two chiefs talked for a
little, and then the whole caravan trailed off with their heads for the
north, and the streak of sand upon their left.

“What is it?” asked Belmont, who found the dragoman riding at his elbow.
“Why are we going out of our course?”

“Drift sand,” Mansoor answered. “Every sometimes the wind bring it all
in one long place like that. To-morrow, if a wind comes, perhaps there
will not be one grain left, but all will be carried up into the air
again. An Arab will sometimes have to go fifty or a hundred miles to go
round a drift. Suppose he tries to cross, his camel breaks its legs,
and he himself is sucked in and swallowed.”

“How long will this be?”

“No one can say.”

“Well, Cochrane, it’s all in our favour. The longer the chase the
better chance for the fresh camels!” and for the hundredth time he
looked back at the long, hard skyline behind them. There was the great,
empty, dun-coloured desert, but where the glint of steel or the twinkle
of white helmet for which he yearned?

And soon they cleared the obstacle in their front. It spindled away
into nothing, as a streak of dust would which has been blown across an
empty room. It was curious to see that when it was so narrow that one
could almost jump it, the Arabs would still go for many hundreds of
yards rather than risk the crossing. Then, with good, hard country
before them once more, the tired beasts were whipped up, and they ambled
on with a double-jointed jogtrot, which set the prisoners nodding and
bowing in grotesque and ludicrous misery. It was fun at first, and they
smiled at each other, but soon the fun had become tragedy as the
terrible camel-ache seized them by spine and waist, with its deep, dull
throb, which rises gradually to a splitting agony.

“I can’t stand it, Sadie,” cried Miss Adams suddenly. “I’ve done my
best. I’m going to fall.”

“No, no, auntie, you’ll break your limbs if you do. Hold up, just a
little, and maybe they’ll stop.”

“Lean back, and hold your saddle behind,” said the Colonel.
“There, you’ll find that will ease the strain.” He took the puggaree
from his hat, and tying the ends together, he slung it over her front
pommel. “Put your foot in the loop,” said he. “It will steady you like
a stirrup.”

The relief was instant, so Stephens did the same for Sadie.
But presently one of the weary doora camels came down with a crash, its
limbs starred out as if it had split asunder, and the caravan had to
come down to its old sober gait.

“Is this another belt of drift sand?” asked the Colonel presently.

“No, it’s white,” said Belmont. “Here, Mansoor, what is that in front
of us?”

But the dragoman shook his head.

“I don’t know what it is, sir. I never saw the same thing before.”

Right across the desert, from north to south, there was drawn a white
line, as straight and clear as if it had been slashed with chalk across
a brown table. It was very thin, but it extended without a break
from horizon to horizon. Tippy Tilly said something to the dragoman.

“It’s the great caravan route,” said Mansoor.

“What makes it white, then?”

“The bones.”

It seemed incredible, and yet it was true, for as they drew nearer they
saw that it was indeed a beaten track across the desert, hollowed out by
long usage, and so covered with bones that they gave the impression of a
continuous white ribbon. Long, snouty heads were scattered everywhere,
and the lines of ribs were so continuous that it looked in places like
the framework of a monstrous serpent. The endless road gleamed in the
sun as if it were paved with ivory. For thousands of years this had
been the highway over the desert, and during all that time no animal of
all those countless caravans had died there without being preserved by
the dry, antiseptic air. No wonder, then, that it was hardly possible
to walk down it now without treading upon their skeletons.

“This must be the route I spoke of,” said Stephens. “I remember marking
it upon the map I made for you, Miss Adams. Baedeker says that it has
been disused on account of the cessation of all trade which followed the
rise of the Dervishes, but that it used to be the main road by which the
skins and gums of Darfur found their way down to Lower Egypt.”

They looked at it with a listless curiosity, for there was enough to
engross them at present in their own fates. The caravan struck to the
south along the old desert track, and this Golgotha of a road seemed to
be a fitting avenue for that which awaited them at the end of it.
Weary camels and weary riders dragged on together towards their
miserable goal.

And now, as the critical moment approached which was to decide their
fate, Colonel Cochrane, weighed down by his fears lest something
terrible should befall the women, put his pride aside to the extent of
asking the advice of the renegade dragoman. The fellow was a villain
and a coward, but at least he was an Oriental, and he understood the
Arab point of view. His change of religion had brought him into closer
contact with the Dervishes, and he had overheard their intimate talk.
Cochrane’s stiff, aristocratic nature fought hard before he could bring
himself to ask advice from such a man, and when he at last did so, it
was in the gruffest and most unconciliatory voice.

“You know the rascals, and you have the same way of looking at things,”
said he. “Our object is to keep things going for another twenty-four
hours. After that it does not much matter what befalls us, for we shall
be out of the reach of rescue. But how can we stave them off for
another day?”

“You know my advice,” the dragoman answered; “I have already answered it
to you. If you will all become as I have, you will certainly be carried
to Khartoum in safety. If you do not, you will never leave our next
camping-place alive.”

The Colonel’s well-curved nose took a higher tilt, and an angry flush
reddened his thin cheeks. He rode in silence for a little, for his
Indian service had left him with a curried-prawn temper, which had had
an extra touch of cayenne added to it by his recent experiences. It was
some minutes before he could trust himself to reply.

“We’ll set that aside,” said he at last. “Some things are possible and
some are not. This is not.”

“You need only pretend.”

“That’s enough,” said the Colonel abruptly.

Mansoor shrugged his shoulders.

“What is the use of asking me, if you become angry when I answer?
If you do not wish to do what I say, then try your own attempt.
At least you cannot say that I have not done all I could to save you.”

“I’m not angry,” the Colonel answered after a pause, in a more
conciliatory voice, “but this is climbing down rather farther than we
care to go. Now, what I thought is this. You might, if you chose, give
this priest, or Moolah, who is coming to us, a hint that we really are
softening a bit upon the point. I don’t think, considering the hole
that we are in, that there can be very much objection to that.
Then, when he comes, we might play up and take an interest and ask for
more instruction, and in that way hold the matter over for a day or two.
Don’t you think that would be the best game?”

“You will do as you like,” said Mansoor. “I have told you once for ever
what I think. If you wish that I speak to the Moolah, I will do so.
It is the fat, little man with the grey beard, upon the brown camel in
front there. I may tell you that he has a name among them for
converting the infidel, and he has a great pride in it, so that he would
certainly prefer that you were not injured if he thought that he might
bring you into Islam.”

“Tell him that our minds are open, then,” said the Colonel. “I don’t
suppose the _padre_ would have gone so far, but now that he is dead I
think we may stretch a point. You go to him, Mansoor, and if you work
it well we will agree to forget what is past. By the way, has Tippy
Tilly said anything?”

“No, sir. He has kept his men together, but he does not understand yet
how he can help you.”

“Neither do I. Well, you go to the Moolah, then, and I’ll tell the
others what we have agreed.”

The prisoners all acquiesced in the Colonel’s plan, with the exception
of the old New England lady, who absolutely refused even to show any
interest in the Mohammedan creed. “I guess I am too old to bow the knee
to Baal,” she said. The most that she would concede was that she would
not openly interfere with anything which her companions might say or do.

“And who is to argue with the priest?” asked Fardet, as they all rode
together, talking the matter over. “It is very important that it should
be done in a natural way, for if he thought that we were only trying to
gain time, he would refuse to have any more to say to us.”

“I think Cochrane should do it, as the proposal is his,” said Belmont.

“Pardon me!” cried the Frenchman. “I will not say a word against our
friend the Colonel, but it is not possible that a man should be fitted
for everything. It will all come to nothing if he attempts it.
The priest will see through the Colonel.”

“Will he?” said the Colonel with dignity.

“Yes, my friend, he will, for, like most of your countrymen, you are
very wanting in sympathy for the ideas of other people, and it is the
great fault which I find with you as a nation.”

“Oh, drop the politics!” cried Belmont impatiently.

“I do not talk politics. What I say is very practical. How can Colonel
Cochrane pretend to this priest that he is really interested in his
religion when, in effect, there is no religion in the world to him
outside some little church in which he has been born and bred? I will
say this for the Colonel, that I do not believe he is at all a
hypocrite, and I am sure that he could not act well enough to deceive
such a man as this priest.”

The Colonel sat with a very stiff back and the blank face of a man who
is not quite sure whether he is being complimented or insulted.

“You can do the talking yourself if you like,” said he at last.
“I should be very glad to be relieved of it.”

“I think that I am best fitted for it, since I am equally interested in
all creeds. When I ask for information, it is because in verity I
desire it, and not because I am playing a part.”

“I certainly think that it would be much better if Monsieur Fardet would
undertake it,” said Mrs. Belmont with decision, and so the matter was
arranged.

The sun was now high, and it shone with dazzling brightness upon the
bleached bones which lay upon the road. Again the torture of thirst
fell upon the little group of survivors, and again, as they rode with
withered tongues and crusted lips, a vision of the saloon of the
_Korosko_ danced like a mirage before their eyes, and they saw the white
napery, the wine-cards by the places, the long necks of the bottles, the
siphons upon the sideboard. Sadie, who had borne up so well, became
suddenly hysterical, and her shrieks of senseless laughter jarred
horribly upon their nerves. Her aunt on one side of her, and Mr.
Stephens on the other, did all they could to soothe her, and at last the
weary, overstrung girl relapsed into something between a sleep and a
faint, hanging limp over her pommel, and only kept from falling by the
friends who clustered round her. The baggage-camels were as weary as
their riders, and again and again they had to jerk at their nose-ropes
to prevent them from lying down. From horizon to horizon stretched that
one huge arch of speckless blue, and up its monstrous concavity crept
the inexorable sun, like some splendid but barbarous deity, who claimed
a tribute of human suffering as his immemorial right.

Their course still lay along the old trade route, but their progress was
very slow, and more than once the two Emirs rode back together, and
shook their heads as they looked at the weary baggage-camels on which
the prisoners were perched. The greatest laggard of all was one which
was ridden by a wounded Soudanese soldier. It was limping badly with a
strained tendon, and it was only by constant prodding that it could be
kept with the others. The Emir Wad Ibrahim raised his Remington, as the
creature hobbled past, and sent a bullet through its brain. The wounded
man flew forwards out of the high saddle, and fell heavily upon the hard
track. His companions in misfortune, looking back, saw him stagger to
his feet with a dazed face. At the same instant a Baggara slipped down
from his camel with a sword in his hand.

“Don’t look! don’t look!” cried Belmont to the ladies, and they all rode
on with their faces to the south. They heard no sound, but the Baggara
passed them a few minutes afterwards. He was cleaning his sword upon
the hairy neck of his camel, and he glanced at them with a quick,
malicious gleam of his teeth as he trotted by. But those who are at the
lowest pitch of human misery are at least secured against the future.
That vicious, threatening smile which might once have thrilled them left
them now unmoved--or stirred them at most to vague resentment.
There were many things to interest them in this old trade route, had
they been in a condition to take notice of them. Here and there along
its course were the crumbling remains of ancient buildings, so old that
no date could be assigned to them, but designed in some far-off
civilisation to give the travellers shade from the sun or protection
from the ever-lawless children of the desert. The mud bricks with which
these refuges were constructed showed that the material had been carried
over from the distant Nile. Once, upon the top of a little knoll, they
saw the shattered plinth of a pillar of red Assouan granite, with the
wide-winged symbol of the Egyptian god across it, and the cartouche of
the second Rameses beneath. After three thousand years one cannot get
away from the ineffaceable footprints of the warrior-king. It is surely
the most wonderful survival of history that one should still be able to
gaze upon him, high-nosed and masterful, as he lies with his powerful
arms crossed upon his chest, majestic even in decay, in the Gizeh
Museum. To the captives, the cartouche was a message of hope, as a sign
that they were not outside the sphere of Egypt. “They’ve left their
card here once, and they may again,” said Belmont, and they all tried to
smile.

And now they came upon one of the most satisfying sights on which the
human eye can ever rest. Here and there, in the depressions at either
side of the road, there had been a thin scurf of green, which meant that
water was not very far from the surface. And then, quite suddenly, the
track dipped down into a bowl-shaped hollow, with a most dainty group of
palm-trees, and a lovely green sward at the bottom of it. The sun
gleaming upon that brilliant patch of clear, restful colour, with the
dark glow of the bare desert around it, made it shine like the purest
emerald in a setting of burnished copper. And then it was not its
beauty only, but its promise for the future: water, shade, all that
weary travellers could ask for. Even Sadie was revived by the cheery
sight, and the spent camels snorted and stepped out more briskly,
stretching their long necks and sniffing the air as they went.
After the unhomely harshness of the desert, it seemed to all of them
that they had never seen anything more beautiful than this. They looked
below at the green sward with the dark, star-like shadows of the
palm-crowns; then they looked up at those deep green leaves against the
rich blue of the sky, and they forgot their impending death in the
beauty of that Nature to whose bosom they were about to return.

The wells in the centre of the grove consisted of seven large and two
small saucer-like cavities filled with peat-coloured water, enough to
form a plentiful supply for any caravan. Camels and men drank it
greedily, though it was tainted by the all-pervading natron. The camels
were picketed, the Arabs threw their sleeping-mats down in the shade,
and the prisoners, after receiving a ration of dates and of doora, were
told that they might do what they would during the heat of the day, and
that the Moolah would come to them before sunset. The ladies were given
the thicker shade of an acacia tree, and the men lay down under the
palms. The great green leaves swished slowly above them; they heard the
low hum of the Arab talk, and the dull champing of the camels, and then
in an instant, by that most mysterious and least understood of miracles,
one was in a green Irish valley, and another saw the long straight line
of Commonwealth Avenue, and a third was dining at a little round table
opposite to the bust of Nelson in the Army and Navy Club, and for him
the swishing of the palm branches had been transformed into the
long-drawn hum of Pall Mall. So the spirits went their several ways,
wandering back along the strange, un-traced tracks of the memory, while
the weary, grimy bodies lay senseless under the palm-trees in the Oasis
of the Libyan Desert.




CHAPTER VIII.


Colonel Cochrane was awakened from his slumber by some one pulling at
his shoulder. As his eyes opened they fell upon the black, anxious face
of Tippy Tilly, the old Egyptian gunner. His crooked finger was laid
upon his thick, liver-coloured lips, and his dark eyes glanced from left
to right with ceaseless vigilance.

“Lie quiet! Do not move!” he whispered, in Arabic. “I will lie here
beside you, and they cannot tell me from the others. You can understand
what I am saying?”

“Yes, if you will talk slowly.”

“Very good. I have no great trust in this black man, Mansoor. I had
rather talk direct with the Miralai.”

“What have you to say?”

“I have waited long, until they should all be asleep, and now in another
hour we shall be called to evening prayer. First of all, here is a
pistol, that you may not say that you are without arms.”

It was a clumsy, old-fashioned thing, but the Colonel saw the glint of a
percussion cap upon the nipple, and knew that it was loaded. He slipped
it into the inner pocket of his Norfolk jacket.

“Thank you,” said he; “speak slowly, so that I may understand you.”

“There are eight of us who wish to go to Egypt. There are also four men
in your party. One of us, Mehemet Ali, has fastened twelve camels
together, which are the fastest of all save only those which are ridden
by the Emirs. There are guards upon watch, but they are scattered in
all directions. The twelve camels are close beside us here--those
twelve behind the acacia tree. If we can only get mounted and started,
I do not think that many can overtake us, and we shall have our rifles
for them. The guards are not strong enough to stop so many of us.
The water-skins are all filled, and we may see the Nile again by
to-morrow night.”

The Colonel could not follow it all, but he understood enough to set a
little spring of hope bubbling in his heart. The last terrible day had
left its mark in his livid face and his hair, which was turning rapidly
to grey. He might have been the father of the spruce well-preserved
soldier who had paced with straight back and military stride up and down
the saloon deck of the Korosko.

“That is excellent,” said he. “But what are we to do about the three
ladies?” The black soldier shrugged his shoulders. “Mefeesh!” said he.
“One of them is old, and in any case there are plenty more women if we
get back to Egypt. These will not come to any hurt, but they will be
placed in the harem of the Khalifa.”

“What you say is nonsense,” said the Colonel sternly. “We shall take
our women with us, or we shall not go at all.”

“I think it is rather you who talk the thing without sense,” the black
man answered angrily. “How can you ask my companions and me to do that
which must end in failure? For years we have waited for such a chance
as this, and now that it has come, you wish us to throw it away owing to
this foolishness about the women.”

“What have we promised you if we come back to Egypt?” asked Cochrane.

“Two hundred Egyptian pounds and promotion in the army--all upon the
word of an Englishman.”

“Very good. Then you shall have three hundred each if you can make some
new plan by which you can take the women with you.”

Tippy Tilly scratched his woolly head in his perplexity.

“We might, indeed, upon some excuse, bring three more of the faster
camels round to this place. Indeed, there are three very good camels
among those which are near the cooking fire. But how are we to get the
women upon them?--and if we had them upon them, we know very well that
they would fall off when they began to gallop. I fear that you men will
fall off, for it is no easy matter to remain upon a galloping camel; but
as to the women, it is impossible. No, we shall leave the women, and if
you will not leave the women, then we shall leave all of you and start
by ourselves.”

“Very good! Go!” said the Colonel abruptly, and settled down as if to
sleep once more. He knew that with Orientals it is the silent man who
is most likely to have his way.

The negro turned and crept away for some little distance, where he was
met by one of his fellaheen comrades, Mehemet Ali, who had charge of the
camels. The two argued for some little time--for those three hundred
golden pieces were not to be lightly resigned. Then the negro crept
back to Colonel Cochrane.

“Mehemet Ali has agreed,” said he. “He has gone to put the nose-rope
upon three more of the camels. But it is foolishness, and we are all
going to our death. Now come with me, and we shall awaken the women and
tell them.”

The Colonel shook his companions and whispered to them what was in the
wind. Belmont and Fardet were ready for any risk. Stephens, to whom
the prospect of a passive death presented little terror, was seized with
a convulsion of fear when he thought of any active exertion to avoid it,
and shivered in all his long, thin limbs. Then he pulled out his
Baedeker and began to write his will upon the flyleaf, but his hand
twitched so that he was hardly legible. By some strange gymnastic of
the legal mind a death, even by violence, if accepted quietly, had a
place in the order of things, while a death which overtook one galloping
frantically over a desert was wholly irregular and discomposing. It was
not dissolution which he feared, but the humiliation and agony of a
fruitless struggle against it.

Colonel Cochrane and Tippy Tilly had crept together under the shadow of
the great acacia tree to the spot where the women were lying. Sadie and
her aunt lay with their arms round each other, the girl’s head pillowed
upon the old woman’s bosom. Mrs. Belmont was awake, and entered into
the scheme in an instant.

“But you must leave me,” said Miss Adams earnestly. “What does it
matter at my age, anyhow?”

“No, no, Aunt Eliza; I won’t move without you! Don’t you think it!”
cried the girl. “You’ve got to come straight away or else we both stay
right here where we are.”

“Come, come, ma’am, there is no time for arguing, or nonsense,” said the
Colonel roughly. “Our lives all depend upon your making an effort, and
we cannot possibly leave you behind.”

“But I will fall off.”

“I’ll tie you on with my puggaree. I wish I had the cummerbund which I
lent poor Stuart. Now, Tippy, I think we might make a break for it!”

But the black soldier had been staring with a disconsolate face out over
the desert, and he turned upon his heel with an oath.

“There!” said he sullenly. “You see what comes of all your foolish
talking! You have ruined our chances as well as your own!”

Half-a-dozen mounted camel-men had appeared suddenly over the lip of the
bowl-shaped hollow, standing out hard and clear against the evening sky
where the copper basin met its great blue lid. They were travelling
fast, and waved their rifles as they came. An instant later the bugle
sounded an alarm, and the camp was up with a buzz like an overturned
bee-hive. The Colonel ran back to his companions, and the black soldier
to his camel. Stephens looked relieved, and Belmont sulky, while
Monsieur Fardet raved, with his one uninjured hand in the air.

“Sacred name of a dog!” he cried. “Is there no end to it, then? Are we
never to come out of the hands of these accursed Dervishes?”

“Oh, they really are Dervishes, are they?” said the Colonel in an acid
voice. “You seem to be altering your opinions. I thought they were an
invention of the British Government.”

The poor fellows’ tempers were getting frayed and thin. The Colonel’s
sneer was like a match to a magazine, and in an instant the Frenchman
was dancing in front of him with a broken torrent of angry words.
His hand was clutching at Cochrane’s throat before Belmont and Stephens
could pull him off.

“If it were not for your grey hairs--” he said.

“Damn your impudence!” cried the Colonel.

“If we have to die, let us die like gentlemen, and not like so many
corner-boys,” said Belmont with dignity.

“I only said I was glad to see that Monsieur Fardet has learned
something from his adventures,” the Colonel sneered.

“Shut up, Cochrane! What do you want to aggravate him for?” cried the
Irishman.

“Upon my word, Belmont, you forget yourself! I do not permit people to
address me in this fashion.”

“You should look after your own manners, then.”

“Gentlemen, gentlemen, here are the ladies!” cried Stephens, and the
angry, over-strained men relapsed into a gloomy silence, pacing up and
down, and jerking viciously at their moustaches. It is a very catching
thing, ill-temper, for even Stephens began to be angry at their anger,
and to scowl at them as they passed him. Here they were at a crisis in
their fate, with the shadow of death above them, and yet their minds
were all absorbed in some personal grievance so slight that they could
hardly put it into words. Misfortune brings the human spirit to a rare
height, but the pendulum still swings.

But soon their attention was drawn away to more important matters.
A council of war was being held beside the wells, and the two Emirs,
stern and composed, were listening to a voluble report from the leader
of the patrol. The prisoners noticed that, though the fierce, old man
stood like a graven image, the younger Emir passed his hand over his
beard once or twice with a nervous gesture, the thin, brown fingers
twitching among the long, black hair.

“I believe the Gippies are after us,” said Belmont. “Not very far off
either, to judge by the fuss they are making.”

“It looks like it. Something has scared them.”

“Now he’s giving orders. What can it be? Here, Mansoor, what is the
matter?”

The dragoman came running up with the light of hope shining upon his
brown face.

“I think they have seen something to frighten them. I believe that the
soldiers are behind us. They have given the order to fill the
water-skins, and be ready for a start when the darkness comes. But I am
ordered to gather you together, for the Moolah is coming to convert you
all. I have already told him that you are all very much inclined to
think the same with him.”

How far Mansoor may have gone with his assurances may never be known,
but the Mussulman preacher came walking towards them at this moment with
a paternal and contented smile upon his face, as one who has a pleasant
and easy task before him. He was a one-eyed man, with a fringe of
grizzled beard and a face which was fat, but which looked as if it had
once been fatter, for it was marked with many folds and creases. He had
a green turban upon his head, which marked him as a Mecca pilgrim.
In one hand he carried a small brown carpet, and in the other a
parchment copy of the Koran. Laying his carpet upon the ground, he
motioned Mansoor to his side, and then gave a circular sweep of his arm
to signify that the prisoners should gather round him, and a downward
wave which meant that they should be seated. So they grouped themselves
round him, sitting on the short green sward under the palm-tree, these
seven forlorn representatives of an alien creed, and in the midst of
them sat the fat little preacher, his one eye dancing from face to face
as he expounded the principles of his newer, cruder, and more earnest
faith. They listened attentively and nodded their heads as Mansoor
translated the exhortation, and with each sign of their acquiescence the
Moolah became more amiable in his manner and more affectionate in his
speech.

“For why should you die, my sweet lambs, when all that is asked of you
is that you should set aside that which will carry you to everlasting
Gehenna, and accept the law of Allah as written by his prophet, which
will assuredly bring you unimaginable joys, as is promised in the Book
of the Camel? For what says the chosen one?”--and he broke away into
one of those dogmatic texts which pass in every creed as an argument.
“Besides, is it not clear that God is with us, since from the beginning,
when we had but sticks against the rifles of the Turks, victory has
always been with us? Have we not taken El Obeid, and taken Khartoum,
and destroyed Hicks and slain Gordon, and prevailed against every one
who has come against us? How, then, can it be said that the blessing of
Allah does not rest upon us?”

The Colonel had been looking about him during the long exhortation of
the Moolah, and he had observed that the Dervishes were cleaning their
guns, counting their cartridges, and making all the preparations of men
who expected that they might soon be called upon to fight. The two
Emirs were conferring together with grave faces, and the leader of the
patrol pointed, as he spoke to them, in the direction of Egypt. It was
evident that there was at least a chance of a rescue if they could only
keep things going for a few more hours. The camels were not recovered
yet from their long march, and the pursuers, if they were indeed close
behind, were almost certain to overtake them.

“For God’s sake, Fardet, try and keep him in play,” said he. “I believe
we have a chance if we can only keep the ball rolling for another hour
or so.”

But a Frenchman’s wounded dignity is not so easily appeased. Monsieur
Fardet sat moodily with his back against the palm-tree, and his black
brows drawn down. He said nothing, but he still pulled at his thick,
strong moustache.

“Come on, Fardet! We depend upon you,” said Belmont.

“Let Colonel Cochrane do it,” the Frenchman answered snappishly.
“He takes too much upon himself this Colonel Cochrane.”

“There! There!” said Belmont soothingly, as if he were speaking to a
fractious child. “I am quite sure that the Colonel will express his
regret at what has happened, and will acknowledge that he was in the
wrong--”

“I’ll do nothing of the sort,” snapped the Colonel.

“Besides, that is merely a personal quarrel,” Belmont continued hastily.
“It is for the good of the whole party that we wish you to speak with
the Moolah, because we all feel that you are the best man for the job.”

But the Frenchman only shrugged his shoulders and relapsed into a deeper
gloom.


The Moolah looked from one to the other, and the kindly expression began
to fade away from his large, baggy face. His mouth drew down at the
corners, and became hard and severe.

“Have these infidels been playing with us, then?” said he to the
dragoman. “Why is it that they talk among themselves and have nothing
to say to me?”

“He’s getting impatient about it,” said Cochrane. “Perhaps I had better
do what I can, Belmont, since this damned fellow has left us in the
lurch.”

But the ready wit of a woman saved the situation.

“I am sure, Monsieur Fardet,” said Mrs. Belmont, “that you, who are a
Frenchman, and therefore a man of gallantry and honour, would not permit
your own wounded feelings to interfere with the fulfilment of your
promise and your duty towards three helpless ladies.”

Fardet was on his feet in an instant, with his hand over his heart.

“You understand my nature, madame,” he cried. “I am incapable of
abandoning a lady. I will do all that I can in this matter. Now,
Mansoor, you may tell the holy man that I am ready to discuss through
you the high matters of his faith with him.”

And he did it with an ingenuity which amazed his companions. He took
the tone of a man who is strongly attracted, and yet has one single
remaining shred of doubt to hold him back. Yet as that one shred was
torn away by the Moolah, there was always some other stubborn little
point which prevented his absolute acceptance of the faith of Islam.
And his questions were all so mixed up with personal compliments to the
priest and self-congratulations that they should have come under the
teachings of so wise a man and so profound a theologian, that the
hanging pouches under the Moolah’s eyes quivered with his satisfaction,
and he was led happily and hopefully onwards from explanation to
explanation, while the blue overhead turned into violet, and the green
leaves into black, until the great serene stars shone out once more
between the crowns of the palm-trees.

“As to the learning of which you speak, my lamb,” said the Moolah, in
answer to some argument of Fardet’s, “I have myself studied at the
University of El Azhar at Cairo, and I know that to which you allude.
But the learning of the faithful is not as the learning of the
unbeliever, and it is not fitting that we pry too deeply into the ways
of Allah. Some stars have tails, oh my sweet lamb, and some have not;
but what does it profit us to know which are which? For God made them
all, and they are very safe in His hands. Therefore, my friend, be not
puffed up by the foolish learning of the West, and understand that there
is only one wisdom, which consists in following the will of Allah as His
chosen prophet has laid it down for us in this book. And now, my lambs,
I see that you are ready to come into Islam, and it is time, for that
bugle tells that we are about to march, and it was the order of the
excellent Emir Abderrahman that your choice should be taken, one way or
the other, before ever we left the wells.”

“Yet, my father, there are other points upon which I would gladly have
instruction,” said the Frenchman, “for, indeed, it is a pleasure to hear
your clear words after the cloudy accounts which we have had from other
teachers.”

But the Moolah had risen, and a gleam of suspicion twinkled in his
single eye.

“This further instruction may well come afterwards,” said he, “since we
shall travel together as far as Khartoum, and it will be a joy to me to
see you grow in wisdom and in virtue as we go.” He walked over to the
fire, and stooping down, with the pompous slowness of a stout man, he
returned with two half-charred sticks, which he laid cross-wise upon the
ground. The Dervishes came clustering over to see the new converts
admitted into the fold. They stood round in the dim light, tall and
fantastic, with the high necks and supercilious heads of the camels
swaying above them.

“Now,” said the Moolah, and his voice had lost its conciliatory and
persuasive tone, “there is no more time for you. Here upon the ground I
have made out of two sticks the foolish and superstitious symbol of your
former creed. You will trample upon it, as a sign that you renounce it,
and you will kiss the Koran, as a sign that you accept it, and what more
you need in the way of instruction shall be given to you as you go.”

They stood up, the four men and the three women, to meet the crisis of
their fate. None of them, except perhaps Miss Adams and Mrs. Belmont,
had any deep religious convictions. All of them were children of this
world, and some of them disagreed with everything which that symbol upon
the earth represented. But there was the European pride, the pride of
the white race which swelled within them, and held them to the faith of
their countrymen. It was a sinful, human, un-Christian motive, and yet
it was about to make them public martyrs to the Christian creed. In the
hush and tension of their nerves low sounds grew suddenly loud upon
their ears. Those swishing palm-leaves above them were like a
swift-flowing river, and far away they could hear the dull, soft
thudding of a galloping camel.

“There’s something coming,” whispered Cochrane. “Try and stave them off
for five minutes longer, Fardet.”

The Frenchman stepped out with a courteous wave of his uninjured arm,
and the air of a man who is prepared to accommodate himself to anything.

“You will tell this holy man that I am quite ready to accept his
teaching, and so I am sure are all my friends,” said he to the dragoman.
“But there is one thing which I should wish him to do in order to set at
rest any possible doubts which may remain in our hearts. Every true
religion can be told by the miracles which those who profess it can
bring about. Even I who am but a humble Christian, can, by virtue of my
religion, do some of these. But you, since your religion is superior,
can no doubt do far more, and so I beg you to give us a sign that we may
be able to say that we know that the religion of Islam is the more
powerful.”

Behind all his dignity and reserve, the Arab has a good fund of
curiosity. The hush among the listening Arabs showed how the words of
the Frenchman as translated by Mansoor appealed to them.

“Such things are in the hands of Allah,” said the priest. “It is not for
us to disturb His laws. But if you have yourself such powers as you
claim, let us be witnesses to them.”

The Frenchman stepped forward, and raising his hand he took a large,
shining date out of the Moolah’s beard. This he swallowed and
immediately produced once more from his left elbow. He had often given
his little conjuring entertainment on board the boat, and his
fellow-passengers had had some good-natured laughter at his expense, for
he was not quite skilful enough to deceive the critical European
intelligence. But now it looked as if this piece of obvious palming
might be the point upon which all their fates would hang. A deep hum of
surprise rose from the ring of Arabs, and deepened as the Frenchman drew
another date from the nostril of a camel and tossed it into the air,
from which, apparently, it never descended. That gaping sleeve was
obvious enough to his companions, but the dim light was all in favour of
the performer. So delighted and interested was the audience
that they paid little heed to a mounted camel-man who trotted swiftly
between the palm trunks. All might have been well had not Fardet,
carried away by his own success, tried to repeat his trick once more,
with the result that the date fell out of his palm, and the deception
stood revealed. In vain he tried to pass on at once to another of his
little stock. The Moolah said something, and an Arab struck Fardet
across the shoulders with the thick shaft of his spear.

“We have had enough child’s play,” said the angry priest. “Are we men
or babes, that you should try to impose upon us in this manner? Here is
the cross and the Koran--which shall it be?”

Fardet looked helplessly round at his companions.

“I can do no more; you asked for five minutes. You have had them,” said
he to Colonel Cochrane.

“And perhaps it is enough,” the soldier answered. “Here are the Emirs.”

The camel-man, whose approach they had heard from afar, had made for the
two Arab chiefs, and had delivered a brief report to them, stabbing with
his forefinger in the direction from which he had come. There was a
rapid exchange of words between the Emirs, and then they strode forward
together to the group around the prisoners. Bigots and barbarians, they
were none the less two most majestic men, as they advanced through the
twilight of the palm grove. The fierce old greybeard raised his hand
and spoke swiftly in short, abrupt sentences, and his savage followers
yelped to him like hounds to a huntsman. The fire that smouldered in
his arrogant eyes shone back at him from a hundred others. Here were to
be read the strength and danger of the Mahdi movement; here in these
convulsed faces, in that fringe of waving arms, in these frantic,
red-hot souls, who asked nothing better than a bloody death, if their
own hands might be bloody when they met it.

“Have the prisoners embraced the true faith?” asked the Emir
Abderrahman, looking at them with his cruel eyes.

The Moolah had his reputation to preserve, and it was not for him to
confess to a failure.

“They were about to embrace it, when--

“Let it rest for a little time, O Moolah.” He gave an order, and the
Arabs all sprang for their camels. The Emir Wad Ibrahim filed off at
once with nearly half the party. The others were mounted and ready,
with their rifles unslung.

“What’s happened?” asked Belmont.

“Things are looking up,” cried the Colonel. “By George, I think we are
going to come through all right. The Gippy Camel Corps are hot on our
trail.”

“How do you know?”

“What else could have scared them?”

“O Colonel, do you really think we shall be saved?” sobbed Sadie.
The dull routine of misery through which they had passed had deadened
all their nerves until they seemed incapable of any acute sensation, but
now this sudden return of hope brought agony with it like the recovery
of a frost-bitten limb. Even the strong, self-contained Belmont was
filled with doubts and apprehensions. He had been hopeful when there
was no sign of relief, and now the approach of it set him trembling.

“Surely they wouldn’t come very weak,” he cried. “Be Jove, if the
Commandant let them come weak, he should be court-martialled.”

“Sure we’re in God’s hands, anyway,” said his wife, in her soothing,
Irish voice. “Kneel down with me, John, dear, if it’s the last time,
and pray that, earth or heaven, we may not be divided.”

“Don’t do that! Don’t!” cried the Colonel anxiously, for he saw that
the eye of the Moolah was upon them. But it was too late, for the two
Roman Catholics had dropped upon their knees and crossed themselves.
A spasm of fury passed over the face of the Mussulman priest at this
public testimony to the failure of his missionary efforts. He turned
and said something to the Emir.

“Stand up!” cried Mansoor. “For your life’s sake, stand up! He is
asking for leave to put you to death.”

“Let him do what he likes!” said the obstinate Irishman; “we will rise
when our prayers are finished, and not before.”

The Emir stood listening to the Moolah, with his baleful gaze upon the
two kneeling figures. Then he gave one or two rapid orders, and four
camels were brought forward. The baggage-camels which they had hitherto
ridden were standing unsaddled where they had been tethered.

“Don’t be a fool, Belmont!” cried the Colonel; “everything depends upon
our humouring them. Do get up, Mrs. Belmont! You are only putting
their backs up!”

The Frenchman shrugged his shoulders as he looked at them.
“_Mon Dieu!_” he cried, “were there ever such impracticable people?
_Voila!_” he added, with a shriek, as the two American ladies fell upon
their knees beside Mrs. Belmont. “It is like the camels--one down, all
down! Was ever anything so absurd?”

But Mr. Stephens had knelt down beside Sadie and buried his haggard face
in his long, thin hands. Only the Colonel and Monsieur Fardet remained
standing. Cochrane looked at the Frenchman with an interrogative eye.

“After all,” said he, “it is stupid to pray all your life, and not to
pray now when we have nothing to hope for except through the goodness of
Providence.” He dropped upon his knees with a rigid, military back, but
his grizzled, unshaven chin upon his chest. The Frenchman looked at his
kneeling companions, and then his eyes travelled onwards to the angry
faces of the Emir and Moolah.

“_Sapristi!_” he growled. “Do they suppose that a Frenchman is afraid
of them?” and so, with an ostentatious sign of the cross, he took his
place upon his knees beside the others. Foul, bedraggled, and wretched,
the seven figures knelt and waited humbly for their fate under the black
shadow of the palm-tree.

The Emir turned to the Moolah with a mocking smile, and pointed at the
results of his ministrations. Then he gave an order, and in an instant
the four men were seized. A couple of deft turns with a camel-halter
secured each of their wrists. Fardet screamed out, for the rope had
bitten into his open wound. The others took it with the dignity of
despair.

“You have ruined everything. I believe you have ruined me also!” cried
Mansoor, wringing his hands. “The women are to get upon these three
camels.”

“Never!” cried Belmont. “We won’t be separated!” He plunged madly, but
he was weak from privation, and two strong men held him by each elbow.

“Don’t fret, John!” cried his wife, as they hurried her towards the
camel. “No harm shall come to me. Don’t struggle, or they’ll hurt you,
dear.”

The four men writhed as they saw the women dragged away from them.
All their agonies had been nothing to this. Sadie and her aunt appeared
to be half senseless from fear. Only Mrs. Belmont kept a brave face.
When they were seated the camels rose, and were led under the tree
behind where the four men were standing.

“I’ve a pistol in me pocket,” said Belmont, looking up at his wife.
“I would give me soul to be able to pass it to you.”

“Keep it, John, and it may be useful yet. I have no fears. Ever since
we prayed I have felt as if our guardian angels had their wings round
us.” She was like a guardian angel herself as she turned to the
shrinking Sadie, and coaxed some little hope back into her despairing
heart.

The short, thick Arab, who had been in command of Wad Ibrahim’s
rearguard, had joined the Emir and the Moolah; the three consulted
together, with occasional oblique glances towards the prisoners.
Then the Emir spoke to Mansoor.

“The chief wishes to know which of you four is the richest man?” said
the dragoman. His fingers were twitching with nervousness and plucking
incessantly at the front of his covercoat.

“Why does he wish to know?” asked the Colonel.

“I do not know.”

“But it is evident,” cried Monsieur Fardet. “He wishes to know which is
the best worth keeping for his ransom.”

“I think we should see this thing through together,” said the Colonel.
“It’s really for you to decide, Stephens, for I have no doubt that you
are the richest of us.”

“I don’t know that I am,” the lawyer answered; “but in any case, I have
no wish to be placed upon a different footing to the others.”

The Emir spoke again in his harsh rasping voice.

“He says,” Mansoor translated, “that the baggage-camels are spent, and
that there is only one beast left which can keep up. It is ready now
for one of you, and you have to decide among yourselves which is to have
it. If one is richer than the others, he will have the preference.”

“Tell him that we are all equally rich.”

“In that case he says that you are to choose at once which is to have
the camel.”

“And the others?”

The dragoman shrugged his shoulders.

“Well,” said the Colonel, “if only one of us is to escape, I think you
fellows will agree with me that it ought to be Belmont, since he is the
married man.”

“Yes, yes, let it be Monsieur Belmont,” cried Fardet.

“I think so also,” said Stephens.

But the Irishman would not hear of it.

“No, no, share and share alike,” he cried. “All sink or all swim, and
the devil take the flincher.”

They wrangled among themselves until they became quite heated in this
struggle of unselfishness. Some one had said that the Colonel should go
because he was the oldest, and the Colonel was a very angry man.

“One would think I was an octogenarian,” he cried. “These remarks are
quite uncalled for.”

“Well, then,” said Belmont, “let us all refuse to go.”

“But this is not very wise,” cried the Frenchman. “See, my friends!
Here are the ladies being carried off alone. Surely it would be far
better that one of us should be with them to advise them.”

They looked at one another in perplexity. What Fardet said was
obviously true, but how could one of them desert his comrades? The Emir
himself suggested the solution.

“The chief says,” said Mansoor, “that if you cannot settle who is to go,
you had better leave it to Allah and draw lots.”

“I don’t think we can do better,” said the Colonel, and his three
companions nodded their assent.

It was the Moolah who approached them with four splinters of palm-bark
protruding from between his fingers.

“He says that he who draws the longest has the camel,” said Mansoor.

“We must agree to abide absolutely by this,” said Cochrane, and again
his companions nodded.

The Dervishes had formed a semicircle in front of them, with a fringe of
the oscillating heads of the camels. Before them was a cooking fire,
which threw its red light over the group. The Emir was standing with
his back to it, and his fierce face towards the prisoners. Behind the
four men was a line of guards, and behind them again the three women,
who looked down from their camels upon this tragedy. With a malicious
smile, the fat, one-eyed Moolah advanced with his fist closed, and the
four little brown spicules protruding from between his fingers.

It was to Belmont that he held them first. The Irishman gave an
involuntary groan, and his wife gasped behind him, for the splinter came
away in his hand. Then it was the Frenchman’s turn, and his was half an
inch longer than Belmont’s. Then came Colonel Cochrane, whose piece was
longer than the two others put together. Stephens’ was no bigger than
Belmont’s. The Colonel was the winner of this terrible lottery.

“You’re welcome to my place, Belmont,” said he. “I’ve neither wife nor
child, and hardly a friend in the world. Go with your wife, and I’ll
stay.”

“No, indeed! An agreement is an agreement. It’s all fair play, and the
prize to the luckiest.”

“The Emir says that you are to mount at once,” said Mansoor, and an Arab
dragged the Colonel by his wrist-rope to the waiting camel.

“He will stay with the rearguard,” said the Emir to his lieutenant.
“You can keep the women with you also.”

“And this dragoman dog?”

“Put him with the others.”

“And they?”

“Put them all to death.”




CHAPTER IX.


As none of the three could understand Arabic, the order of the Emir
would have been unintelligible to them had it not been for the conduct
of Mansoor. The unfortunate dragoman, after all his treachery and all
his subservience and apostasy, found his worst fears realised when the
Dervish leader gave his curt command. With a shriek of fear the poor
wretch threw himself forward upon his face, and clutched at the edge of
the Arab’s jibbeh, clawing with his brown fingers at the edge of the
cotton skirt. The Emir tugged to free himself, and then, finding that
he was still held by that convulsive grip, he turned and kicked at
Mansoor with the vicious impatience with which one drives off a
pestering cur. The dragoman’s high red tarboosh flew up into the air,
and he lay groaning upon his face where the stunning blow of the Arab’s
horny foot had left him.

All was bustle and movement in the camp, for the old Emir had mounted
his camel, and some of his party were already beginning to follow their
companions. The squat lieutenant, the Moolah, and about a dozen
Dervishes surrounded the prisoners. They had not mounted their camels,
for they were told off to be the ministers of death. The three men
understood as they looked upon their faces that the sand was running
very low in the glass of their lives. Their hands were still bound, but
their guards had ceased to hold them. They turned round, all three, and
said good-bye to the women upon the camels.

“All up now, Norah,” said Belmont. “It’s hard luck when there was a
chance of a rescue, but we’ve done our best.”

For the first time his wife had broken down. She was sobbing
convulsively, with her face between her hands.

“Don’t cry, little woman! We’ve had a good time together. Give my love
to all friends at Bray! Remember me to Amy McCarthy and to the
Blessingtons. You’ll find there is enough and to spare, but I would
take Roger’s advice about the investments. Mind that!”

“O John, I won’t live without you!” Sorrow for her sorrow broke the
strong man down, and he buried his face in the hairy side of her camel.
The two of them sobbed helplessly together.

Stephens meanwhile had pushed his way to Sadie’s beast. She saw his
worn earnest face looking up at her through the dim light.

“Don’t be afraid for your aunt and for yourself,” said he. “I am sure
that you will escape. Colonel Cochrane will look after you.
The Egyptians cannot be far behind. I do hope you will have a good
drink before you leave the wells. I wish I could give your aunt my
jacket, for it will be cold to-night. I’m afraid I can’t get it off.
She should keep some of the bread, and eat it in the early morning.”

He spoke quite quietly, like a man who is arranging the details of a
picnic. A sudden glow of admiration for this quietly consistent man
warmed her impulsive heart.

“How unselfish you are!” she cried. “I never saw any one like you.
Talk about saints! There you stand in the very presence of death, and
you think only of us.”

“I want to say a last word to you, Sadie, if you don’t mind. I should
die so much happier. I have often wanted to speak to you, but I thought
that perhaps you would laugh, for you never took anything very
seriously, did you? That was quite natural of course with your high
spirits, but still it was very serious to me. But now I am really a
dead man, so it does not matter very much what I say.”

“Oh don’t, Mr. Stephens!” cried the girl.

“I won’t, if it is very painful to you. As I said, it would make me die
happier, but I don’t want to be selfish about it. If I thought it would
darken your life afterwards, or be a sad recollection to you, I would
not say another word.”

“What did you wish to say?”

“It was only to tell you how I loved you. I always loved you. From the
first I was a different man when I was with you. But of course it was
absurd, I knew that well enough. I never said anything, but I tried not
to make myself ridiculous. But I just want you to know about it now
that it can’t matter one way or the other. You’ll understand that I
really do love you when I tell you that, if it were not that I knew you
were frightened and unhappy, these last two days in which we have been
always together would have been infinitely the happiest of my life.”

The girl sat pale and silent, looking down with wondering eyes at his
upturned face. She did not know what to do or say in the solemn
presence of this love which burned so brightly under the shadow of
death. To her child’s heart it seemed incomprehensible--and yet she
understood that it was sweet and beautiful also.

“I won’t say any more,” said he; “I can see that it only bothers you.
But I wanted you to know, and now you do know, so it is all right.
Thank you for listening so patiently and gently. Good-bye, little
Sadie! I can’t put my hand up. Will you put yours down?”

She did so and Stephens kissed it. Then he turned and took his place
once more between Belmont and Fardet. In his whole life of struggle and
success he had never felt such a glow of quiet contentment as suffused
him at that instant when the grip of death was closing upon him.
There is no arguing about love. It is the innermost fact of life--the
one which obscures and changes all the others, the only one which is
absolutely satisfying and complete. Pain is pleasure, and want is
comfort, and death is sweetness when once that golden mist is round it.
So it was that Stephens could have sung with joy as he faced his
murderers. He really had not time to think about them. The important,
all-engrossing, delightful thing was that she could not look upon him as
a casual acquaintance any more. Through all her life she would think of
him--she would know.

Colonel Cochrane’s camel was at one side, and the old soldier, whose
wrists had been freed, had been looking down upon the scene, and
wondering in his tenacious way whether all hope must really be
abandoned. It was evident that the Arabs who were grouped round the
victims were to remain behind with them, while the others who were
mounted would guard the three women and himself. He could not
understand why the throats of his companions had not been already cut,
unless it were that with an Eastern refinement of cruelty this rearguard
would wait until the Egyptians were close to them, so that the warm
bodies of their victims might be an insult to the pursuers. No doubt
that was the right explanation. The Colonel had heard of such a trick
before.

But in that case there would not be more than twelve Arabs with the
prisoners. Were there any of the friendly ones among them? If Tippy
Tilly and six of his men were there, and if Belmont could get his arms
free and his hand upon his revolver, they might come through yet.
The Colonel craned his neck and groaned in his disappointment. He could
see the faces of the guards in the firelight. They were all Baggara
Arabs, men who were beyond either pity or bribery. Tippy Tilly and the
others must have gone on with the advance. For the first time the stiff
old soldier abandoned hope.

“Good-bye, you fellows! God bless you!” he cried, as a negro pulled at
his camel’s nose-ring and made him follow the others. The women came
after him, in a misery too deep for words. Their departure was a relief
to the three men who were left.

“I am glad they are gone,” said Stephens, from his heart.

“Yes, yes, it is better,” cried Fardet. “How long are we to wait?”

“Not very long now,” said Belmont grimly, as the Arabs closed in around
them.

The Colonel and the three women gave one backward glance when they came
to the edge of the oasis. Between the straight stems of the palms they
saw the gleam of the fire, and above the group of Arabs they caught a
last glimpse of the three white hats. An instant later, the camels
began to trot, and when they looked back once more the palm grove was
only a black clump with the vague twinkle of a light somewhere in the
heart of it. As with yearning eyes they gazed at that throbbing red
point in the darkness, they passed over the edge of the depression, and
in an instant the huge, silent, moonlit desert was round them without a
sign of the oasis which they had left. On every side the velvet,
blue-black sky, with its blazing stars, sloped downwards to the vast,
dun-coloured plain. The two were blurred into one at their point of
junction.

The women had sat in the silence of despair, and the Colonel had been
silent also--for what could he say?--but suddenly all four started in
their saddles, and Sadie gave a sharp cry of dismay. In the hush of the
night there had come from behind them the petulant crack of a rifle,
then another, then several together, with a brisk rat-tat-tat, and then
after an interval, one more.

“It may be the rescuers! It may be the Egyptians!” cried Mrs. Belmont,
with a sudden flicker of hope. “Colonel Cochrane, don’t you think it
may be the Egyptians?”

“Yes, yes,” Sadie whimpered. “It must be the Egyptians.”

The Colonel had listened expectantly, but all was silent again. Then he
took his hat off with a solemn gesture.

“There is no use deceiving ourselves, Mrs. Belmont,” said he; “we may as
well face the truth. Our friends are gone from us, but they have met
their end like brave men.”

“But why should they fire their guns? They had ... they had spears.”
She shuddered as she said it.

“That is true,” said the Colonel. “I would not for the world take away
any real grounds of hope which you may have; but on the other hand,
there is no use in preparing bitter disappointments for ourselves.
If we had been listening to an attack, we should have heard some reply.
Besides, an Egyptian attack would have been an attack in force.
No doubt it _is_, as you say, a little strange that they should have
wasted their cartridges--by Jove, look at that!”

He was pointing over the eastern desert. Two figures were moving across
its expanse, swiftly and stealthily, furtive dark shadows against the
lighter ground. They saw them dimly, dipping and rising over the
rolling desert, now lost, now reappearing in the uncertain light.
They were flying away from the Arabs. And then, suddenly they halted
upon the summit of a sand-hill, and the prisoners could see them
outlined plainly against the sky. They were camel-men, but they sat
their camels astride as a horseman sits his horse.

“Gippy Camel Corps!” cried the Colonel.

“Two men,” said Miss Adams, in a voice of despair.

“Only a vedette, ma’am! Throwing feelers out all over the desert.
This is one of them. Main body ten miles off, as likely as not.
There they go giving the alarm! Good old Camel Corps!”

The self-contained, methodical soldier had suddenly turned almost
inarticulate with his excitement. There was a red flash upon the top of
the sand-hill, and then another, followed by the crack of the rifles.
Then with a whisk the two figures were gone, as swiftly and silently as
two trout in a stream.

The Arabs had halted for an instant, as if uncertain whether they should
delay their journey to pursue them or not. There was nothing left to
pursue now, for amid the undulations of the sand-drift the vedettes
might have gone in any direction. The Emir galloped back along the
line, with exhortations and orders. Then the camels began to trot, and
the hopes of the prisoners were dulled by the agonies of the terrible
jolt. Mile after mile, mile after mile, they sped onwards over that
vast expanse, the women clinging as best they might to the pommels, the
Colonel almost as spent as they, but still keenly on the look-out for
any sign of the pursuers.

“I think ... I think,” cried Mrs. Belmont, “that something is moving
in front of us.”

The Colonel raised himself upon his saddle, and screened his eyes from
the moonshine.

“By Jove, you’re right there, ma’am. There are men over yonder.”

They could all see them now, a straggling line of riders far ahead of
them in the desert.

“They are going in the same direction as we,” cried Mrs. Belmont, whose
eyes were very much better than the Colonel’s.

Cochrane muttered an oath into his moustache.

“Look at the tracks there,” said he; “of course, it’s our own vanguard
who left the palm grove before us. The chief keeps us at this infernal
pace in order to close up with them.”

As they drew closer they could see plainly that it was indeed the other
body of Arabs, and presently the Emir Wad Ibrahim came trotting back to
take counsel with the Emir Abderrahman. They pointed in the direction
in which the vedettes had appeared, and shook their heads like men who
have many and grave misgivings. Then the raiders joined into one long,
straggling line, and the whole body moved steadily on towards the
Southern Cross, which was twinkling just over the skyline in front of
them. Hour after hour the dreadful trot continued, while the fainting
ladies clung on convulsively, and Cochrane, worn out but indomitable,
encouraged them to hold out, and peered backwards over the desert for
the first glad signs of their pursuers. The blood throbbed in his
temples, and he cried that he heard the roll of drums coming out of the
darkness. In his feverish delirium he saw clouds of pursuers at their
very heels, and during the long night he was for ever crying glad
tidings which ended in disappointment and heartache. The rise of the
sun showed the desert stretching away around them with nothing moving
upon its monstrous face except themselves. With dull eyes and heavy
hearts they stared round at that huge and empty expanse. Their hopes
thinned away like the light morning mist upon the horizon.

It was shocking to the ladies to look at their companion, and to think
of the spruce, hale old soldier who had been their fellow-passenger from
Cairo. As in the case of Miss Adams, old age seemed to have pounced
upon him in one spring. His hair, which had grizzled hour by hour
during his privations, was now of a silvery white. White stubble, too,
had obscured the firm, clean line of his chin and throat. The veins of
his face were injected, and his features were shot with heavy wrinkles.
He rode with his back arched and his chin sunk upon his breast, for the
old, time-rotted body was worn out, but in his bright, alert eyes there
was always a trace of the gallant tenant who lived in the shattered
house. Delirious, spent, and dying, he preserved his chivalrous,
protecting air as he turned to the ladies, shot little scraps of advice
and encouragement at them, and peered back continually for the help
which never came.

An hour after sunrise the raiders called a halt, and food and water
were served out to all. Then at a more moderate pace they pursued their
southern journey, their long, straggling line trailing out over a
quarter of a mile of desert. From their more careless bearing and the
way in which they chatted as they rode, it was clear that they thought
that they had shaken off their pursuers. Their direction now was east
as well as south, and it was evidently their intention after this long
detour to strike the Nile again at some point far above the Egyptian
outposts. Already the character of the scenery was changing, and they
were losing the long levels of the pebbly desert, and coming once more
upon those fantastic, sunburned, black rocks, and that rich orange sand
through which they had already passed. On every side of them rose the
scaly, conical hills with their loose, slag-like debris, and
jagged-edged khors, with sinuous streams of sand running like
water-courses down their centre. The camels followed each other,
twisting in and out among the boulders, and scrambling with their
adhesive, spongy feet over places which would have been impossible for
horses. Among the broken rocks those behind could sometimes only see
the long, undulating, darting necks of the creatures in front, as if it
were some nightmare procession of serpents. Indeed, it had much the
effect of a dream upon the prisoners, for there was no sound, save the
soft, dull padding and shuffling of the feet. The strange, wild frieze
moved slowly and silently onwards amid a setting of black stone and
yellow sand, with the one arch of vivid blue spanning the rugged edges
of the ravine.

Miss Adams, who had been frozen into silence during the long cold night,
began to thaw now in the cheery warmth of the rising sun. She looked
about her, and rubbed her thin hands together.

“Why, Sadie,” she remarked, “I thought I heard you in the night, dear,
and now I see that you have been crying.”

“I’ve been thinking, auntie.”

“Well, we must try and think of others, dearie, and not of ourselves.”

“It’s not of myself, auntie.”

“Never fret about me, Sadie.”

“No, auntie, I was not thinking of you.”

“Was it of any one in particular?”

“Of Mr. Stephens, auntie. How gentle he was, and how brave! To think
of him fixing up every little thing for us, and trying to pull his
jacket over his poor roped-up hands, with those murderers waiting all
round him. He’s my saint and hero from now ever after.”

“Well, he’s out of his troubles anyhow,” said Miss Adams, with that
bluntness which the years bring with them.

“Then I wish I was also.”

“I don’t see how that would help him.”

“Well, I think he might feel less lonesome,” said Sadie, and drooped her
saucy little chin upon her breast.

The four had been riding in silence for some little time, when the
Colonel clapped his hand to his brow with a gesture of dismay.

“Good God!” he cried, “I am going off my head.”

Again and again they had perceived it during the night, but he had
seemed quite rational since daybreak. They were shocked therefore at
this sudden outbreak, and tried to calm him with soothing words.

“Mad as a hatter,” he shouted. “Whatever do you think I saw?”

“Don’t trouble about it, whatever it was,” said Mrs. Belmont, laying
her hand soothingly upon his as the camels closed together. “It is no
wonder that you are overdone. You have thought and worked for all of us
so long. We shall halt presently, and a few hours’ sleep will quite
restore you.”

But the Colonel looked up again, and again he cried out in his agitation
and surprise.

“I never saw anything plainer in my life,” he groaned. “It is on the
point of rock on our right front--poor old Stuart with my red cummerbund
round his head just the same as we left him.”

The ladies had followed the direction of the Colonel’s frightened gaze,
and in an instant they were all as amazed as he.

There was a black, bulging ridge like a bastion upon the right side of
the terrible khor up which the camels were winding. At one point it
rose into a small pinnacle. On this pinnacle stood a solitary,
motionless figure, clad entirely in black, save for a brilliant dash of
scarlet upon his head. There could not surely be two such short sturdy
figures, or such large colourless faces, in the Libyan Desert. His
shoulders were stooping forward, and he seemed to be staring intently
down into the ravine. His pose and outline were like a caricature of
the great Napoleon.

“Can it possibly be he?”

“It must be. It is!” cried the ladies. “You see he is looking towards
us and waving his hand.”

“Good Heavens! They’ll shoot him! Get down, you fool, or you’ll be
shot!” roared the Colonel. But his dry throat would only emit a
discordant croaking.

Several of the Dervishes had seen the singular apparition upon the hill,
and had unslung their Remingtons, but a long arm suddenly shot up behind
the figure of the Birmingham clergyman, a brown hand seized upon his
skirts, and he disappeared with a snap. Higher up the pass, just below
the spot where Mr. Stuart had been standing, appeared the tall figure of
the Emir Abderrahman. He had sprung upon a boulder, and was shouting
and waving his arms, but the shouts were drowned in a long, rippling
roar of musketry from each side of the khor. The bastion-like cliff was
fringed with gun-barrels, with red tarbooshes drooping over the
triggers. From the other lip also came the long spurts of flame and the
angry clatter of the rifles. The raiders were caught in an ambuscade.
The Emir fell, but was up again and waving. There was a splotch of
blood upon his long white beard. He kept pointing and gesticulating,
but his scattered followers could not understand what he wanted.
Some of them came tearing down the pass, and some from behind were
pushing to the front. A few dismounted and tried to climb up sword in
hand to that deadly line of muzzles, but one by one they were hit, and
came rolling from rock to rock to the bottom of the ravine.
The shooting was not very good. One negro made his way unharmed up the
whole side, only to have his brains dashed out with the butt-end of a
Martini at the top. The Emir had fallen off his rock and lay in a
crumpled heap, like a brown and white patchwork quilt, at the bottom of
it. And then when half of them were down it became evident, even to
those exalted fanatical souls, that there was no chance for them, and
that they must get out of these fatal rocks and into the desert again.
They galloped down the pass, and it is a frightful thing to see a camel
galloping over broken ground. The beast’s own terror, his ungainly
bounds, the sprawl of his four legs all in the air together, his hideous
cries, and the yells of his rider who is bucked high from his saddle
with every spring, make a picture which is not to be forgotten.
The women screamed as this mad torrent of frenzied creatures came
pouring past them, but the Colonel edged his camel and theirs farther
and farther in among the rocks and away from the retreating Arabs.
The air was full of whistling bullets, and they could hear them smacking
loudly against the stones all round them.

“Keep quiet, and they’ll pass us,” whispered the Colonel, who was all
himself again now that the hour for action had arrived. “I wish to
Heaven I could see Tippy Tilly or any of his friends. Now is the time
for them to help us.” He watched the mad stream of fugitives as they
flew past upon their shambling, squattering, loose-jointed beasts, but
the black face of the Egyptian gunner was not among them.

And now it really did seem as if the whole body of them, in their haste
to get clear of the ravine, had not a thought to spend upon the
prisoners. The rush was past, and only stragglers were running the
gauntlet of the fierce fire which poured upon them from above. The last
of all, a young Baggara with a black moustache and pointed beard, looked
up as he passed and shook his sword in impotent passion at the Egyptian
riflemen. At the same instant a bullet struck his camel, and the
creature collapsed, all neck and legs, upon the ground. The young Arab
sprang off its back, and, seizing its nose-ring, he beat it savagely
with the flat of his sword to make it stand up. But the dim, glazing
eye told its own tale, and in desert warfare the death of the beast is
the death of the rider. The Baggara glared round like a lion at bay,
his dark eyes flashing murderously from under his red turban. A crimson
spot, and then another, sprang out upon his dark skin, but he never
winced at the bullet wounds. His fierce gaze had fallen upon the
prisoners, and with an exultant shout he was dashing towards them, his
broad-bladed sword gleaming above his head. Miss Adams was the nearest
to him, but at the sight of the rushing figure and the maniac face she
threw herself off the camel upon the far side. The Arab bounded on to a
rock and aimed a thrust at Mrs. Belmont, but before the point could
reach her the Colonel leaned forward with his pistol and blew the man’s
head in. Yet with a concentrated rage, which was superior even to the
agony of death, the fellow lay kicking and striking, bounding about
among the loose stones like a fish upon the shingle.

“Don’t be frightened, ladies,” cried the Colonel. “He is quite dead, I
assure you. I am so sorry to have done this in your presence, but the
fellow was dangerous. I had a little score of my own to settle with
him, for he was the man who tried to break my ribs with his Remington.
I hope you are not hurt, Miss Adams! One instant, and I will come down
to you.”

But the old Boston lady was by no means hurt, for the rocks had been so
high that she had a very short distance to fall from her saddle.
Sadie, Mrs. Belmont, and Colonel Cochrane had all descended by slipping
on to the boulders and climbing down from them. But they found Miss
Adams on her feet, and waving the remains of her green veil in triumph.

“Hurrah, Sadie! Hurrah, my own darling Sadie!” she was shrieking.
“We are saved, my girl, we are saved after all.”

“By George, so we are!” cried the Colonel, and they all shouted in an
ecstasy together.

But Sadie had learned to think more about others during those terrible
days of schooling. Her arms were round Mrs. Belmont, and her cheek
against hers.

“You dear, sweet angel,” she cried, “how can we have the heart to be
glad when you--when you--”

“But I don’t believe it is so,” cried the brave Irishwoman. “No, I’ll
never believe it until I see John’s body lying before me. And when I
see that, I don’t want to live to see anything more.”

The last Dervish had clattered down the khor, and now above them on
either cliff they could see the Egyptians--tall, thin, square shouldered
figures, looking, when outlined against the blue sky, wonderfully like
the warriors in the ancient bas-reliefs. Their camels were in the
background, and they were hurrying to join them. At the same time
others began to ride down from the farther end of the ravine, their dark
faces flushed and their eyes shining with the excitement of victory and
pursuit. A very small Englishman, with a straw-coloured moustache and a
weary manner, was riding at the head of them. He halted his camel
beside the fugitives and saluted the ladies. He wore brown boots and
brown belts with steel buckles, which looked trim and workmanlike
against his khaki uniform.

“Had ’em that time--had ’em proper!” said he. “Very glad to have been
of any assistance, I’m sure. Hope you’re none the worse for it all.
What I mean, it’s rather rough work for ladies.”

“You’re from Halfa, I suppose?” asked the Colonel.

“No, we’re from the other show. We’re the Sarras crowd, you know.
We met in the desert, and we headed ’em off, and the other Johnnies
herded ’em behind. We’ve got ’em on toast, I tell you. Get up on that
rock and you’ll see things happen. It’s going to be a knockout in one
round this time.”

“We left some of our people at the Wells. We are very uneasy about
them,” said the Colonel. “I suppose you haven’t heard anything of
them?”

The young officer looked serious and shook his head. “Bad job that!”
said he. “They’re a poisonous crowd when you put ’em in a corner.
What I mean, we never expected to see you alive, and we’re very glad to
pull any of you out of the fire. The most we hoped was that we might
revenge you.”

“Any other Englishman with you?”

“Archer is with the flanking party. He’ll have to come past, for I
don’t think there is any other way down. We’ve got one of your chaps up
there--a funny old bird with a red top-knot. See you later, I hope!
Good day, ladies!” He touched his helmet, tapped his camel, and trotted
on after his men.

“We can’t do better than stay where we are until they are all past,”
said the Colonel, for it was evident now that the men from above would
have to come round. In a broken single file they went past, black men
and brown, Soudanese and fellaheen, but all of the best, for the Camel
Corps is the _corps d’elite_ of the Egyptian army. Each had a brown
bandolier over his chest and his rifle held across his thigh. A large
man with a drooping black moustache and a pair of binoculars in his hand
was riding at the side of them. “Hulloa, Archer!” croaked the Colonel.
The officer looked at him with the vacant, unresponsive eye of a
complete stranger.

“I’m Cochrane, you know! We travelled up together.”

“Excuse me, sir, but you have the advantage of me,” said the officer.
“I knew a Colonel Cochrane Cochrane, but you are not the man. He was
three inches taller than you, with black hair and--”

“That’s all right,” cried the Colonel testily. “You try a few days with
the Dervishes, and see if your friends will recognise you!”

“Good God, Cochrane, is it really you? I could not have believed it.
Great Scott, what you must have been through! I’ve heard before of
fellows going grey in a night, but, by Jove--”

“Quite so,” said the Colonel, flushing.

“Allow me to hint to you, Archer, that if you could get some food and
drink for these ladies, instead of discussing my personal appearance, it
would be much more practical.”

“That’s all right,” said Captain Archer. “Your friend Stuart knows that
you are here, and he is bringing some stuff round for you. Poor fare,
ladies, but the best we have! You’re an old soldier, Cochrane. Get up
on the rocks presently, and you’ll see a lovely sight. No time to stop,
for we shall be in action again in five minutes. Anything I can do
before I go?”

“You haven’t got such a thing as a cigar?” asked the Colonel wistfully.

Archer drew a thick satisfying partaga from his case, and handed it
down, with half-a-dozen wax vestas. Then he cantered after his men, and
the old soldier leaned back against the rock and drew in the fragrant
smoke. It was then that his jangled nerves knew the full virtue of
tobacco, the gentle anodyne which stays the failing strength and soothes
the worrying brain. He watched the dim blue reek swirling up from him,
and he felt the pleasant aromatic bite upon his palate, while a restful
languor crept over his weary and harassed body. The three ladies sat
together upon a flat rock.

“Good land, what a sight you are, Sadie!” cried Miss Adams suddenly, and
it was the first reappearance of her old self. “What _would_ your
mother say if she saw you? Why, sakes alive, your hair is full of straw
and your frock clean crazy!”

“I guess we all want some setting to rights,” said Sadie, in a voice
which was much more subdued than that of the Sadie of old.
“Mrs. Belmont, you look just too perfectly sweet anyhow, but if you’ll
allow me I’ll fix your dress for you.”

But Mrs. Belmont’s eyes were far away, and she shook her head sadly as
she gently put the girl’s hands aside.

“I do not care how I look. I cannot think of it,” said she; “could
_you_, if you had left the man you love behind you, as I have mine?”

“I’m begin--beginning to think I have,” sobbed poor Sadie, and buried
her hot face in Mrs. Belmont’s motherly bosom.




CHAPTER X.


The Camel Corps had all passed onwards down the khor in pursuit of the
retreating Dervishes, and for a few minutes the escaped prisoners had
been left alone. But now there came a cheery voice calling upon them,
and a red turban bobbed about among the rocks, with the large white face
of the Nonconformist minister smiling from beneath it. He had a thick
lance with which to support his injured leg, and this murderous crutch
combined with his peaceful appearance to give him a most incongruous
aspect--as of a sheep which has suddenly developed claws. Behind him
were two negroes with a basket and a water-skin.

“Not a word! Not a word!” he cried, as he stumped up to them. “I know
exactly how you feel. I’ve been there myself. Bring the water, Ali!
Only half a cup, Miss Adams; you shall have some more presently.
Now your turn, Mrs. Belmont! Dear me, dear me, you poor souls, how my
heart does bleed for you! There’s bread and meat in the basket, but you
must be very moderate at first.” He chuckled with joy, and slapped his
fat hands together as he watched them.

“But the others?” he asked, his face turning grave again.

The Colonel shook his head. “We left them behind at the wells. I fear
that it is all over with them.”

“Tut, tut!” cried the clergyman, in a boisterous voice, which could not
cover the despondency of his expression; “you thought, no doubt, that it
was all over with me, but here I am in spite of it. Never lose heart,
Mrs. Belmont. Your husband’s position could not possibly be as hopeless
as mine was.”

“When I saw you standing on that rock up yonder, I put it down to
delirium,” said the Colonel. “If the ladies had not seen you, I should
never have ventured to believe it.”

“I am afraid that I behaved very badly. Captain Archer says that I
nearly spoiled all their plans, and that I deserved to be tried by a
drumhead court-martial and shot. The fact is that, when I heard the
Arabs beneath me, I forgot myself in my anxiety to know if any of you
were left.”

“I wonder that you were not shot without any drumhead court-martial,”
said the Colonel. “But how in the world did you get here?”

“The Halfa people were close upon our track at the time when I was
abandoned, and they picked me up in the desert. I must have been
delirious, I suppose, for they tell me that they heard my voice, singing
hymns, a long way off, and it was that, under the providence of God,
which brought them to me. They had a camel ambulance, and I was quite
myself again by next day. I came with the Sarras people after we met
them, because they have the doctor with them. My wound is nothing, and
he says that a man of my habit will be the better for the loss of blood.
And now, my friends”--his big, brown eyes lost their twinkle, and became
very solemn and reverent--“we have all been upon the very confines of
death, and our dear companions may be so at this instant. The same
Power which saved us may save them, and let us pray together that it may
be so, always remembering that if, in spite of our prayers, it should
_not_ be so, then that also must be accepted as the best and wisest
thing.”

So they knelt together among the black rocks, and prayed as some of them
had never prayed before. It was very well to discuss prayer and treat
it lightly and philosophically upon the deck of the _Korosko_. It was
easy to feel strong and self-confident in the comfortable deck-chair,
with the slippered Arab handing round the coffee and liqueurs. But they
had been swept out of that placid stream of existence, and dashed
against the horrible, jagged facts of life. Battered and shaken, they
must have something to cling to. A blind, inexorable destiny was too
horrible a belief. A chastening power, acting intelligently and for a
purpose--a living, working power, tearing them out of their grooves,
breaking down their small sectarian ways, forcing them into the better
path--that was what they had learned to realise during these days of
horror. Great hands had closed suddenly upon them, and had moulded them
into new shapes, and fitted them for new uses. Could such a power be
deflected by any human supplication? It was that or nothing--the last
court of appeal, left open to injured humanity. And so they all prayed,
as a lover loves, or a poet writes, from the very inside of their souls,
and they rose with that singular, illogical feeling of inward peace and
satisfaction which prayer only can give.

“Hush!” said Cochrane. “Listen!”

The sound of a volley came crackling up the narrow khor, and then
another and another. The Colonel was fidgeting about like an old horse
which hears the bugle of the hunt and the yapping of the pack.

“Where can we see what is going on?”

“Come this way! This way, if you please! There is a path up to the
top. If the ladies will come after me, they will be spared the sight of
anything painful.”

The clergyman led them along the side to avoid the bodies which were
littered thickly down the bottom of the khor. It was hard walking over
the shingly, slaggy stones, but they made their way to the summit at
last. Beneath them lay the vast expanse of the rolling desert, and in
the foreground such a scene as none of them are ever likely to forget.
In that perfectly dry and clear light, with the unvarying brown tint of
the hard desert as a background, every detail stood out as clearly as if
these were toy figures arranged upon a table within hand’s-touch of
them.

The Dervishes--or what was left of them--were riding slowly some little
distance out in a confused crowd, their patchwork jibbehs and red
turbans swaying with the motion of their camels. They did not present
the appearance of men who were defeated, for their movements were very
deliberate, but they looked about them and changed their formation as if
they were uncertain what their tactics ought to be. It was no wonder
that they were puzzled, for upon their spent camels their situation was
as hopeless as could be conceived. The Sarras men had all emerged from
the khor, and had dismounted, the beasts being held in groups of four,
while the rifle-men knelt in a long line with a woolly, curling fringe
of smoke, sending volley after volley at the Arabs, who shot back in a
desultory fashion from the backs of their camels. But it was not upon
the sullen group of Dervishes, nor yet upon the long line of kneeling
rifle-men, that the eyes of the spectators were fixed. Far out upon the
desert, three squadrons of the Halfa Camel Corps were coming up in a
dense close column, which wheeled beautifully into a widespread
semicircle as it approached. The Arabs were caught between two fires.

“By Jove!” cried the Colonel. “See that!”

The camels of the Dervishes had all knelt down simultaneously, and the
men had sprung from their backs. In front of them was a tall, stately
figure, who could only be the Emir Wad Ibrahim. They saw him kneel for
an instant in prayer. Then he rose, and taking something from his
saddle he placed it very deliberately upon the sand and stood upon it.

“Good man!” cried the Colonel. “He is standing upon his sheepskin.”

“What do you mean by that?” asked Stuart.

“Every Arab has a sheepskin upon his saddle. When he recognises that
his position is perfectly hopeless, and yet is determined to fight to
the death, he takes his sheepskin off and stands upon it until he dies.
See, they are all upon their sheepskins. They will neither give nor
take quarter now.”

The drama beneath them was rapidly approaching its climax. The Halfa
Corps was well up, and a ring of smoke and flame surrounded the clump of
kneeling Dervishes, who answered it as best they could. Many of them
were already down, but the rest loaded and fired with the unflinching
courage which has always made them worthy antagonists. A dozen
khaki-dressed figures upon the sand showed that it was no bloodless
victory for the Egyptians. But now there was a stirring bugle call from
the Sarras men, and another answered it from the Halfa Corps.
Their camels were down also, and the men had formed up into a single,
long, curved line. One last volley, and they were charging inwards with
the wild inspiriting yell which the blacks had brought with them from
their central African wilds. For a minute there was a mad vortex of
rushing figures, rifle butts rising and falling, spear-heads gleaming
and darting among the rolling dust cloud. Then the bugle rang out once
more, the Egyptians fell back and formed up with the quick precision of
highly disciplined troops, and there in the centre, each upon his
sheepskin, lay the gallant barbarian and his raiders. The nineteenth
century had been revenged upon the seventh.

The three women had stared horror-stricken and yet fascinated at the
stirring scene before them. Now Sadie and her aunt were sobbing
together. The Colonel had turned to them with some cheering words when
his eyes fell upon the face of Mrs. Belmont. It was as white and set as
if it were carved from ivory, and her large grey eyes were fixed as if
she were in a trance.

“Good Heavens, Mrs. Belmont, what _is_ the matter?” he cried.

For answer she pointed out over the desert. Far away, miles on the
other side of the scene of the fight, a small body of men were riding
towards them.

“By Jove, yes; there’s some one there. Who can it be?”

They were all straining their eyes, but the distance was so great that
they could only be sure that they were camel-men and about a dozen in
number.

“It’s those devils who were left behind in the palm grove,” said
Cochrane. “There’s no one else it can be. One consolation, they can’t
get away again. They’ve walked right into the lion’s mouth.”

But Mrs. Belmont was still gazing with the same fixed intensity, and the
same ivory face. Now, with a wild shriek of joy, she threw her two
hands into the air. “It’s they!” she screamed. “They are saved!
It’s they, Colonel, it’s they! Oh, Miss Adams, Miss Adams, it is they!”
She capered about on the top of the hill with wild eyes like an excited
child.

Her companions would not believe her, for they could see nothing, but
there are moments when our mortal senses are more acute than those who
have never put their whole heart and soul into them can ever realise.
Mrs. Belmont had already run down the rocky path, on the way to her
camel, before they could distinguish that which had long before carried
its glad message to her. In the van of the approaching party, three
white dots shimmered in the sun, and they could only come from the three
European hats. The riders were travelling swiftly, and by the time
their comrades had started to meet them they could plainly see that it
was indeed Belmont, Fardet, and Stephens, with the dragoman Mansoor, and
the wounded Soudanese rifleman. As they came together they saw that
their escort consisted of Tippy Tilly and the other old Egyptian
soldiers. Belmont rushed onwards to meet his wife, but Fardet stopped
to grasp the Colonel’s hand.

“_Vive la France! Vivent les Anglais!_” he was yelling. “_Tout va
bien, n’est ce pas_, Colonel? Ah, _canaille! Vivent la croix et
les Chretiens!_” He was incoherent in his delight.

The Colonel, too, was as enthusiastic as his Anglo-Saxon standard would
permit. He could not gesticulate, but he laughed in the nervous
crackling way which was his top-note of emotion.

“My dear boy, I am deuced glad to see you all again. I gave you up for
lost. Never was as pleased at anything in my life! How did you get
away?”

“It was all your doing.”

“Mine?”

“Yes, my friend, and I have been quarrelling with you--ungrateful wretch
that I am!”

“But how did I save you?”

“It was you who arranged with this excellent Tippy Tilly and the others
that they should have so much if they brought us alive into Egypt again.
They slipped away in the darkness and hid themselves in the grove.
Then, when we were left, they crept up with their rifles and shot the
men who were about to murder us. That cursed Moolah, I am sorry they
shot him, for I believe that I could have persuaded him to be a
Christian. And now, with your permission, I will hurry on and embrace
Miss Adams, for Belmont has his wife, and Stephens has Miss Sadie, so I
think it is very evident that the sympathy of Miss Adams is reserved for
me.”

A fortnight had passed away, and the special boat which had been placed
at the disposal of the rescued tourists was already far north of
Assiout. Next morning they would find themselves at Baliani, where one
takes the express for Cairo. It was, therefore, their last evening
together. Mrs. Shlesinger and her child, who had escaped unhurt, had
already been sent down from the frontier. Miss Adams had been very ill
after her privations, and this was the first time that she had been
allowed to come upon deck after dinner. She sat now in a lounge chair,
thinner, sterner, and kindlier than ever, while Sadie stood beside her
and tucked the rugs around her shoulders. Mr. Stephens was carrying
over the coffee and placing it on the wicker table beside them. On the
other side of the deck Belmont and his wife were seated together in
silent sympathy and contentment.

Monsieur Fardet was leaning against the rail, and arguing about the
remissness of the British Government in not taking a more complete
control of the Egyptian frontier, while the Colonel stood very erect in
front of him, with the red end of a cigar-stump protruding from under
his moustache.

But what was the matter with the Colonel? Who would have recognised him
who had only seen the broken old man in the Libyan Desert? There might
be some little grizzling about the moustache, but the hair was back once
more at the fine glossy black which had been so much admired upon the
voyage up. With a stony face and an unsympathetic manner he had
received, upon his return to Halfa, all the commiserations about the
dreadful way in which his privations had blanched him, and then diving
into his cabin, he had reappeared within an hour exactly as he had been
before that fatal moment when he had been cut off from the manifold
resources of civilisation. And he looked in such a sternly questioning
manner at every one who stared at him, that no one had the moral
courage to make any remark about this modern miracle. It was observed
from that time forward that, if the Colonel had only to ride a hundred
yards into the desert, he always began his preparations by putting a
small black bottle with a pink label into the side-pocket of his coat.
But those who knew him best at times when a man may best be known, said
that the old soldier had a young man’s heart and a young man’s spirit--
so that if he wished to keep a young man’s colour also it was not very
unreasonable after all.

It was very soothing and restful up there on the saloon deck, with no
sound but the gentle lipping of the water as it rippled against the
sides of the steamer. The red after-glow was in the western sky, and it
mottled the broad, smooth river with crimson. Dimly they could discern
the tall figures of herons standing upon the sand-banks, and farther off
the line of riverside date-palms glided past them in a majestic
procession. Once more the silver stars were twinkling out, the same
clear, placid, inexorable stars to which their weary eyes had been so
often upturned during the long nights of their desert martyrdom.

“Where do you put up in Cairo, Miss Adams?” asked Mrs. Belmont at last.

“Shepheard’s, I think.”

“And you, Mr. Stephens?”

“Oh, Shepheard’s, decidedly.”

“We are staying at the Continental. I hope we shall not lose sight of
you.”

“I don’t want ever to lose sight of you, Mrs. Belmont,” cried Sadie.
“Oh, you must come to the States, and we’ll give you just a lovely
time.”

Mrs. Belmont laughed, in her pleasant, mellow fashion.

“We have our duty to do in Ireland, and we have been too long away from
it already. My husband has his business, and I have my home, and they
are both going to rack and ruin. Besides,” she added slyly, “it is just
possible that if we did come to the States we might not find you there.”

“We must all meet again,” said Belmont, “if only to talk our adventures
over once more. It will be easier in a year or two. We are still too
near them.”

“And yet how far away and dream-like it all seems!” remarked his wife.
“Providence is very good in softening disagreeable remembrances in our
minds. All this feels to me as if it had happened in some previous
existence.”

Fardet held up his wrist with a cotton bandage still round it.

“The body does not forget as quickly as the mind. This does not look
very dream-like or far away, Mrs. Belmont.”

“How hard it is that some should be spared, and some not! If only Mr.
Brown and Mr. Headingly were with us, then I should not have one care in
the world,” cried Sadie. “Why should they have been taken, and we
left?”

Mr. Stuart had limped on to the deck with an open book in his hand, a
thick stick supporting his injured leg.

“Why is the ripe fruit picked, and the unripe left?” said he in answer
to the young girl’s exclamation. “We know nothing of the spiritual
state of these poor dear young fellows, but the great Master Gardener
plucks His fruit according to His own knowledge. I brought you up a
passage to read to you.”

There was a lantern upon the table, and he sat down beside it.
The yellow light shone upon his heavy cheek and the red edges of his
book. The strong, steady voice rose above the wash of the water.

“‘Let them give thanks whom the Lord hath redeemed and delivered from
the hand of the enemy, and gathered them out of the lands, from the
east, and from the west, from the north, and from the south. They went
astray in the wilderness out of the way, and found no city to dwell in.
Hungry and thirsty, their soul fainted in them. So they cried unto the
Lord in their trouble, and He delivered them from their distress.
He led them forth by the right way, that they might go to the city where
they dwelt. Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord for His
goodness, and declare the wonders that He doeth for the children of
men.’

“It sounds as if it were composed for us, and yet it was written two
thousand years ago,” said the clergyman, as he closed the book.
“In every age man has been forced to acknowledge the guiding hand which
leads him. For my part I don’t believe that inspiration stopped two
thousand years ago. When Tennyson wrote with such fervour and
conviction”:--

   ‘Oh, yet we trust that somehow good
    Will be the final goal of ill,’

“He was repeating the message which had been given to him, just as Micah
or Ezekiel, when the world was younger, repeated some cruder and more
elementary message.”

“That is all very well, Mr. Stuart,” said the Frenchman; “you ask me to
praise God for taking me out of danger and pain, but what I want to know
is why, since He has arranged all things, He ever put me into that pain
and danger. I have, in my opinion, more occasion to blame than to
praise. You would not thank me for pulling you out of that river if it
was also I who pushed you in. The most which you can claim for your
Providence is that it has healed the wound which its own hand
inflicted.”

“I don’t deny the difficulty,” said the clergyman slowly; “no one who is
not self-deceived _can_ deny the difficulty. Look how boldly Tennyson
faced it in that same poem, the grandest and deepest and most obviously
inspired in our language. Remember the effect which it had upon him.”

    ‘I falter where I firmly trod,
      And falling with my weight of cares
      Upon the great world’s altar stairs
     Which slope through darkness up to God;

     I stretch lame hands of faith and grope
      And gather dust and chaff, and call
      To what I feel is Lord of all,
     And faintly trust the larger hope.’

“It is the central mystery of mysteries--the problem of sin and
suffering, the one huge difficulty which the reasoner has to solve in
order to vindicate the dealings of God with man. But take our own case
as an example. I, for one, am very clear what I have got out of our
experience. I say it with all humility, but I have a clearer view of my
duties than ever I had before. It has taught me to be less remiss in
saying what I think to be true, less indolent in doing what I feel to be
right.”

“And I,” cried Sadie. “It has taught me more than all my life put
together. I have learned so much and unlearned so much. I am a
different girl.”

“I never understood my own nature before,” said Stephens. “I can hardly
say that I had a nature to understand. I lived for what was
unimportant, and I neglected what was vital.”

“Oh, a good shake-up does nobody any harm,” the Colonel remarked.
“Too much of the feather-bed-and-four-meals-a-day life is not good for
man or woman.”

“It is my firm belief,” said Mrs. Belmont gravely, “that there was not
one of us who did not rise to a greater height during those days in the
desert than ever before or since. When our sins come to be weighed,
much may be forgiven us for the sake of those unselfish days.”

They all sat in thoughtful silence for a little, while the scarlet
streaks turned to carmine, and the grey shadows deepened, and the
wild-fowl flew past in dark straggling V’s over the dull metallic
surface of the great smooth-flowing Nile. A cold wind had sprung up
from the eastward, and some of the party rose to leave the deck.
Stephens leaned forward to Sadie.

“Do you remember what you promised when you were in the desert?” he
whispered.

“What was that?”

“You said that if you escaped you would try in future to make some one
else happy.”

“Then I must do so.”

“You have,” said he, and their hands met under the shadow of the table.

Tales of Terror and Mystery


By

Sir Arthur Conan Doyle



Contents

Tales of Terror

  The Horror of the Heights
  The Leather Funnel
  The New Catacomb
  The Case of Lady Sannox
  The Terror of Blue John Gap
  The Brazilian Cat


Tales of Mystery

  The Lost Special
  The Beetle-Hunter
  The Man with the Watches
  The Japanned Box
  The Black Doctor
  The Jew's Breastplate





Tales of Terror



The Horror of the Heights

The idea that the extraordinary narrative which has been called the
Joyce-Armstrong Fragment is an elaborate practical joke evolved by some
unknown person, cursed by a perverted and sinister sense of humour, has
now been abandoned by all who have examined the matter. The most
macabre and imaginative of plotters would hesitate before linking his
morbid fancies with the unquestioned and tragic facts which reinforce
the statement.  Though the assertions contained in it are amazing and
even monstrous, it is none the less forcing itself upon the general
intelligence that they are true, and that we must readjust our ideas to
the new situation.  This world of ours appears to be separated by a
slight and precarious margin of safety from a most singular and
unexpected danger.  I will endeavour in this narrative, which
reproduces the original document in its necessarily somewhat
fragmentary form, to lay before the reader the whole of the facts up to
date, prefacing my statement by saying that, if there be any who doubt
the narrative of Joyce-Armstrong, there can be no question at all as to
the facts concerning Lieutenant Myrtle, R. N., and Mr. Hay Connor, who
undoubtedly met their end in the manner described.

The Joyce-Armstrong Fragment was found in the field which is called
Lower Haycock, lying one mile to the westward of the village of
Withyham, upon the Kent and Sussex border.  It was on the 15th
September last that an agricultural labourer, James Flynn, in the
employment of Mathew Dodd, farmer, of the Chauntry Farm, Withyham,
perceived a briar pipe lying near the footpath which skirts the hedge
in Lower Haycock.  A few paces farther on he picked up a pair of broken
binocular glasses.  Finally, among some nettles in the ditch, he caught
sight of a flat, canvas-backed book, which proved to be a note-book
with detachable leaves, some of which had come loose and were
fluttering along the base of the hedge.  These he collected, but some,
including the first, were never recovered, and leave a deplorable
hiatus in this all-important statement.  The note-book was taken by the
labourer to his master, who in turn showed it to Dr. J. H. Atherton, of
Hartfield.  This gentleman at once recognized the need for an expert
examination, and the manuscript was forwarded to the Aero Club in
London, where it now lies.

The first two pages of the manuscript are missing.  There is also one
torn away at the end of the narrative, though none of these affect the
general coherence of the story.  It is conjectured that the missing
opening is concerned with the record of Mr. Joyce-Armstrong's
qualifications as an aeronaut, which can be gathered from other sources
and are admitted to be unsurpassed among the air-pilots of England.
For many years he has been looked upon as among the most daring and the
most intellectual of flying men, a combination which has enabled him to
both invent and test several new devices, including the common
gyroscopic attachment which is known by his name.  The main body of the
manuscript is written neatly in ink, but the last few lines are in
pencil and are so ragged as to be hardly legible--exactly, in fact, as
they might be expected to appear if they were scribbled off hurriedly
from the seat of a moving aeroplane.  There are, it may be added,
several stains, both on the last page and on the outside cover which
have been pronounced by the Home Office experts to be blood--probably
human and certainly mammalian.  The fact that something closely
resembling the organism of malaria was discovered in this blood, and
that Joyce-Armstrong is known to have suffered from intermittent fever,
is a remarkable example of the new weapons which modern science has
placed in the hands of our detectives.

And now a word as to the personality of the author of this epoch-making
statement.  Joyce-Armstrong, according to the few friends who really
knew something of the man, was a poet and a dreamer, as well as a
mechanic and an inventor.  He was a man of considerable wealth, much of
which he had spent in the pursuit of his aeronautical hobby.  He had
four private aeroplanes in his hangars near Devizes, and is said to
have made no fewer than one hundred and seventy ascents in the course
of last year.  He was a retiring man with dark moods, in which he would
avoid the society of his fellows.  Captain Dangerfield, who knew him
better than anyone, says that there were times when his eccentricity
threatened to develop into something more serious.  His habit of
carrying a shot-gun with him in his aeroplane was one manifestation of
it.

Another was the morbid effect which the fall of Lieutenant Myrtle had
upon his mind.  Myrtle, who was attempting the height record, fell from
an altitude of something over thirty thousand feet.  Horrible to
narrate, his head was entirely obliterated, though his body and limbs
preserved their configuration.  At every gathering of airmen,
Joyce-Armstrong, according to Dangerfield, would ask, with an enigmatic
smile:  "And where, pray, is Myrtle's head?"

On another occasion after dinner, at the mess of the Flying School on
Salisbury Plain, he started a debate as to what will be the most
permanent danger which airmen will have to encounter. Having listened
to successive opinions as to air-pockets, faulty construction, and
over-banking, he ended by shrugging his shoulders and refusing to put
forward his own views, though he gave the impression that they differed
from any advanced by his companions.

It is worth remarking that after his own complete disappearance it was
found that his private affairs were arranged with a precision which may
show that he had a strong premonition of disaster.  With these
essential explanations I will now give the narrative exactly as it
stands, beginning at page three of the blood-soaked note-book:

"Nevertheless, when I dined at Rheims with Coselli and Gustav Raymond I
found that neither of them was aware of any particular danger in the
higher layers of the atmosphere.  I did not actually say what was in my
thoughts, but I got so near to it that if they had any corresponding
idea they could not have failed to express it.  But then they are two
empty, vainglorious fellows with no thought beyond seeing their silly
names in the newspaper.  It is interesting to note that neither of them
had ever been much beyond the twenty-thousand-foot level.  Of course,
men have been higher than this both in balloons and in the ascent of
mountains.  It must be well above that point that the aeroplane enters
the danger zone--always presuming that my premonitions are correct.

"Aeroplaning has been with us now for more than twenty years, and one
might well ask:  Why should this peril be only revealing itself in our
day?  The answer is obvious.  In the old days of weak engines, when a
hundred horse-power Gnome or Green was considered ample for every need,
the flights were very restricted.  Now that three hundred horse-power
is the rule rather than the exception, visits to the upper layers have
become easier and more common. Some of us can remember how, in our
youth, Garros made a world-wide reputation by attaining nineteen
thousand feet, and it was considered a remarkable achievement to fly
over the Alps.  Our standard now has been immeasurably raised, and
there are twenty high flights for one in former years.  Many of them
have been undertaken with impunity. The thirty-thousand-foot level has
been reached time after time with no discomfort beyond cold and asthma.
What does this prove?  A visitor might descend upon this planet a
thousand times and never see a tiger.  Yet tigers exist, and if he
chanced to come down into a jungle he might be devoured.  There are
jungles of the upper air, and there are worse things than tigers which
inhabit them.  I believe in time they will map these jungles accurately
out.  Even at the present moment I could name two of them.  One of them
lies over the Pau-Biarritz district of France. Another is just over my
head as I write here in my house in Wiltshire.  I rather think there is
a third in the Homburg-Wiesbaden district.

"It was the disappearance of the airmen that first set me thinking.  Of
course, everyone said that they had fallen into the sea, but that did
not satisfy me at all.  First, there was Verrier in France; his machine
was found near Bayonne, but they never got his body.  There was the
case of Baxter also, who vanished, though his engine and some of the
iron fixings were found in a wood in Leicestershire.  In that case, Dr.
Middleton, of Amesbury, who was watching the flight with a telescope,
declares that just before the clouds obscured the view he saw the
machine, which was at an enormous height, suddenly rise perpendicularly
upwards in a succession of jerks in a manner that he would have thought
to be impossible.  That was the last seen of Baxter.  There was a
correspondence in the papers, but it never led to anything.  There were
several other similar cases, and then there was the death of Hay
Connor.  What a cackle there was about an unsolved mystery of the air,
and what columns in the halfpenny papers, and yet how little was ever
done to get to the bottom of the business!  He came down in a
tremendous vol-plane from an unknown height.  He never got off his
machine and died in his pilot's seat.  Died of what? 'Heart disease,'
said the doctors.  Rubbish!  Hay Connor's heart was as sound as mine
is.  What did Venables say?  Venables was the only man who was at his
side when he died.  He said that he was shivering and looked like a man
who had been badly scared.  'Died of fright,' said Venables, but could
not imagine what he was frightened about.  Only said one word to
Venables, which sounded like 'Monstrous.'  They could make nothing of
that at the inquest. But I could make something of it.  Monsters!  That
was the last word of poor Harry Hay Connor.  And he DID die of fright,
just as Venables thought.

"And then there was Myrtle's head.  Do you really believe--does anybody
really believe--that a man's head could be driven clean into his body
by the force of a fall?  Well, perhaps it may be possible, but I, for
one, have never believed that it was so with Myrtle.  And the grease
upon his clothes--'all slimy with grease,' said somebody at the
inquest.  Queer that nobody got thinking after that!  I did--but, then,
I had been thinking for a good long time. I've made three ascents--how
Dangerfield used to chaff me about my shot-gun--but I've never been
high enough.  Now, with this new, light Paul Veroner machine and its
one hundred and seventy-five Robur, I should easily touch the thirty
thousand tomorrow.  I'll have a shot at the record.  Maybe I shall have
a shot at something else as well.  Of course, it's dangerous.  If a
fellow wants to avoid danger he had best keep out of flying altogether
and subside finally into flannel slippers and a dressing-gown.  But
I'll visit the air-jungle tomorrow--and if there's anything there I
shall know it.  If I return, I'll find myself a bit of a celebrity.  If
I don't this note-book may explain what I am trying to do, and how I
lost my life in doing it.  But no drivel about accidents or mysteries,
if YOU please.

"I chose my Paul Veroner monoplane for the job.  There's nothing like a
monoplane when real work is to be done. Beaumont found that out in very
early days.  For one thing it doesn't mind damp, and the weather looks
as if we should be in the clouds all the time.  It's a bonny little
model and answers my hand like a tender-mouthed horse.  The engine is a
ten-cylinder rotary Robur working up to one hundred and seventy-five.
It has all the modern improvements--enclosed fuselage, high-curved
landing skids, brakes, gyroscopic steadiers, and three speeds, worked
by an alteration of the angle of the planes upon the Venetian-blind
principle.  I took a shot-gun with me and a dozen cartridges filled
with buck-shot.  You should have seen the face of Perkins, my old
mechanic, when I directed him to put them in.  I was dressed like an
Arctic explorer, with two jerseys under my overalls, thick socks inside
my padded boots, a storm-cap with flaps, and my talc goggles.  It was
stifling outside the hangars, but I was going for the summit of the
Himalayas, and had to dress for the part. Perkins knew there was
something on and implored me to take him with me.  Perhaps I should if
I were using the biplane, but a monoplane is a one-man show--if you
want to get the last foot of life out of it.  Of course, I took an
oxygen bag; the man who goes for the altitude record without one will
either be frozen or smothered--or both.

"I had a good look at the planes, the rudder-bar, and the elevating
lever before I got in.  Everything was in order so far as I could see.
Then I switched on my engine and found that she was running sweetly.
When they let her go she rose almost at once upon the lowest speed.  I
circled my home field once or twice just to warm her up, and then with
a wave to Perkins and the others, I flattened out my planes and put her
on her highest.  She skimmed like a swallow down wind for eight or ten
miles until I turned her nose up a little and she began to climb in a
great spiral for the cloud-bank above me.  It's all-important to rise
slowly and adapt yourself to the pressure as you go.

"It was a close, warm day for an English September, and there was the
hush and heaviness of impending rain.  Now and then there came sudden
puffs of wind from the south-west--one of them so gusty and unexpected
that it caught me napping and turned me half-round for an instant.  I
remember the time when gusts and whirls and air-pockets used to be
things of danger--before we learned to put an overmastering power into
our engines.  Just as I reached the cloud-banks, with the altimeter
marking three thousand, down came the rain.  My word, how it poured!
It drummed upon my wings and lashed against my face, blurring my
glasses so that I could hardly see.  I got down on to a low speed, for
it was painful to travel against it.  As I got higher it became hail,
and I had to turn tail to it.  One of my cylinders was out of action--a
dirty plug, I should imagine, but still I was rising steadily with
plenty of power.  After a bit the trouble passed, whatever it was, and
I heard the full, deep-throated purr--the ten singing as one.  That's
where the beauty of our modern silencers comes in.  We can at last
control our engines by ear.  How they squeal and squeak and sob when
they are in trouble!  All those cries for help were wasted in the old
days, when every sound was swallowed up by the monstrous racket of the
machine.  If only the early aviators could come back to see the beauty
and perfection of the mechanism which have been bought at the cost of
their lives!

"About nine-thirty I was nearing the clouds.  Down below me, all
blurred and shadowed with rain, lay the vast expanse of Salisbury
Plain.  Half a dozen flying machines were doing hackwork at the
thousand-foot level, looking like little black swallows against the
green background.  I dare say they were wondering what I was doing up
in cloud-land.  Suddenly a grey curtain drew across beneath me and the
wet folds of vapours were swirling round my face.  It was clammily cold
and miserable.  But I was above the hail-storm, and that was something
gained.  The cloud was as dark and thick as a London fog.  In my
anxiety to get clear, I cocked her nose up until the automatic
alarm-bell rang, and I actually began to slide backwards.  My sopped
and dripping wings had made me heavier than I thought, but presently I
was in lighter cloud, and soon had cleared the first layer.  There was
a second--opal-coloured and fleecy--at a great height above my head, a
white, unbroken ceiling above, and a dark, unbroken floor below, with
the monoplane labouring upwards upon a vast spiral between them.  It is
deadly lonely in these cloud-spaces.  Once a great flight of some small
water-birds went past me, flying very fast to the westwards. The quick
whir of their wings and their musical cry were cheery to my ear.  I
fancy that they were teal, but I am a wretched zoologist.  Now that we
humans have become birds we must really learn to know our brethren by
sight.

"The wind down beneath me whirled and swayed the broad cloud-plain.
Once a great eddy formed in it, a whirlpool of vapour, and through it,
as down a funnel, I caught sight of the distant world. A large white
biplane was passing at a vast depth beneath me.  I fancy it was the
morning mail service betwixt Bristol and London. Then the drift swirled
inwards again and the great solitude was unbroken.

"Just after ten I touched the lower edge of the upper cloud-stratum. It
consisted of fine diaphanous vapour drifting swiftly from the
westwards.  The wind had been steadily rising all this time and it was
now blowing a sharp breeze--twenty-eight an hour by my gauge.  Already
it was very cold, though my altimeter only marked nine thousand.  The
engines were working beautifully, and we went droning steadily upwards.
The cloud-bank was thicker than I had expected, but at last it thinned
out into a golden mist before me, and then in an instant I had shot out
from it, and there was an unclouded sky and a brilliant sun above my
head--all blue and gold above, all shining silver below, one vast,
glimmering plain as far as my eyes could reach.  It was a quarter past
ten o'clock, and the barograph needle pointed to twelve thousand eight
hundred.  Up I went and up, my ears concentrated upon the deep purring
of my motor, my eyes busy always with the watch, the revolution
indicator, the petrol lever, and the oil pump.  No wonder aviators are
said to be a fearless race.  With so many things to think of there is
no time to trouble about oneself.  About this time I noted how
unreliable is the compass when above a certain height from earth.  At
fifteen thousand feet mine was pointing east and a point south.  The
sun and the wind gave me my true bearings.

"I had hoped to reach an eternal stillness in these high altitudes, but
with every thousand feet of ascent the gale grew stronger.  My machine
groaned and trembled in every joint and rivet as she faced it, and
swept away like a sheet of paper when I banked her on the turn,
skimming down wind at a greater pace, perhaps, than ever mortal man has
moved.  Yet I had always to turn again and tack up in the wind's eye,
for it was not merely a height record that I was after.  By all my
calculations it was above little Wiltshire that my air-jungle lay, and
all my labour might be lost if I struck the outer layers at some
farther point.

"When I reached the nineteen-thousand-foot level, which was about
midday, the wind was so severe that I looked with some anxiety to the
stays of my wings, expecting momentarily to see them snap or slacken.
I even cast loose the parachute behind me, and fastened its hook into
the ring of my leathern belt, so as to be ready for the worst.  Now was
the time when a bit of scamped work by the mechanic is paid for by the
life of the aeronaut.  But she held together bravely.  Every cord and
strut was humming and vibrating like so many harp-strings, but it was
glorious to see how, for all the beating and the buffeting, she was
still the conqueror of Nature and the mistress of the sky.  There is
surely something divine in man himself that he should rise so superior
to the limitations which Creation seemed to impose--rise, too, by such
unselfish, heroic devotion as this air-conquest has shown.  Talk of
human degeneration!  When has such a story as this been written in the
annals of our race?

"These were the thoughts in my head as I climbed that monstrous,
inclined plane with the wind sometimes beating in my face and sometimes
whistling behind my ears, while the cloud-land beneath me fell away to
such a distance that the folds and hummocks of silver had all smoothed
out into one flat, shining plain.  But suddenly I had a horrible and
unprecedented experience.  I have known before what it is to be in what
our neighbours have called a tourbillon, but never on such a scale as
this.  That huge, sweeping river of wind of which I have spoken had, as
it appears, whirlpools within it which were as monstrous as itself.
Without a moment's warning I was dragged suddenly into the heart of
one.  I spun round for a minute or two with such velocity that I almost
lost my senses, and then fell suddenly, left wing foremost, down the
vacuum funnel in the centre.  I dropped like a stone, and lost nearly a
thousand feet.  It was only my belt that kept me in my seat, and the
shock and breathlessness left me hanging half-insensible over the side
of the fuselage.  But I am always capable of a supreme effort--it is my
one great merit as an aviator.  I was conscious that the descent was
slower.  The whirlpool was a cone rather than a funnel, and I had come
to the apex.  With a terrific wrench, throwing my weight all to one
side, I levelled my planes and brought her head away from the wind.  In
an instant I had shot out of the eddies and was skimming down the sky.
Then, shaken but victorious, I turned her nose up and began once more
my steady grind on the upward spiral.  I took a large sweep to avoid
the danger-spot of the whirlpool, and soon I was safely above it. Just
after one o'clock I was twenty-one thousand feet above the sea-level.
To my great joy I had topped the gale, and with every hundred feet of
ascent the air grew stiller.  On the other hand, it was very cold, and
I was conscious of that peculiar nausea which goes with rarefaction of
the air.  For the first time I unscrewed the mouth of my oxygen bag and
took an occasional whiff of the glorious gas.  I could feel it running
like a cordial through my veins, and I was exhilarated almost to the
point of drunkenness. I shouted and sang as I soared upwards into the
cold, still outer world.

"It is very clear to me that the insensibility which came upon
Glaisher, and in a lesser degree upon Coxwell, when, in 1862, they
ascended in a balloon to the height of thirty thousand feet, was due to
the extreme speed with which a perpendicular ascent is made. Doing it
at an easy gradient and accustoming oneself to the lessened barometric
pressure by slow degrees, there are no such dreadful symptoms.  At the
same great height I found that even without my oxygen inhaler I could
breathe without undue distress. It was bitterly cold, however, and my
thermometer was at zero, Fahrenheit.  At one-thirty I was nearly seven
miles above the surface of the earth, and still ascending steadily.  I
found, however, that the rarefied air was giving markedly less support
to my planes, and that my angle of ascent had to be considerably
lowered in consequence.  It was already clear that even with my light
weight and strong engine-power there was a point in front of me where I
should be held.  To make matters worse, one of my sparking-plugs was in
trouble again and there was intermittent misfiring in the engine.  My
heart was heavy with the fear of failure.

"It was about that time that I had a most extraordinary experience.
Something whizzed past me in a trail of smoke and exploded with a loud,
hissing sound, sending forth a cloud of steam.  For the instant I could
not imagine what had happened. Then I remembered that the earth is for
ever being bombarded by meteor stones, and would be hardly inhabitable
were they not in nearly every case turned to vapour in the outer layers
of the atmosphere.  Here is a new danger for the high-altitude man, for
two others passed me when I was nearing the forty-thousand-foot mark.
I cannot doubt that at the edge of the earth's envelope the risk would
be a very real one.

"My barograph needle marked forty-one thousand three hundred when I
became aware that I could go no farther.  Physically, the strain was
not as yet greater than I could bear but my machine had reached its
limit.  The attenuated air gave no firm support to the wings, and the
least tilt developed into side-slip, while she seemed sluggish on her
controls.  Possibly, had the engine been at its best, another thousand
feet might have been within our capacity, but it was still misfiring,
and two out of the ten cylinders appeared to be out of action.  If I
had not already reached the zone for which I was searching then I
should never see it upon this journey.  But was it not possible that I
had attained it?  Soaring in circles like a monstrous hawk upon the
forty-thousand-foot level I let the monoplane guide herself, and with
my Mannheim glass I made a careful observation of my surroundings. The
heavens were perfectly clear; there was no indication of those dangers
which I had imagined.

"I have said that I was soaring in circles.  It struck me suddenly that
I would do well to take a wider sweep and open up a new airtract.  If
the hunter entered an earth-jungle he would drive through it if he
wished to find his game.  My reasoning had led me to believe that the
air-jungle which I had imagined lay somewhere over Wiltshire.  This
should be to the south and west of me.  I took my bearings from the
sun, for the compass was hopeless and no trace of earth was to be
seen--nothing but the distant, silver cloud-plain.  However, I got my
direction as best I might and kept her head straight to the mark.  I
reckoned that my petrol supply would not last for more than another
hour or so, but I could afford to use it to the last drop, since a
single magnificent vol-plane could at any time take me to the earth.

"Suddenly I was aware of something new.  The air in front of me had
lost its crystal clearness.  It was full of long, ragged wisps of
something which I can only compare to very fine cigarette smoke.  It
hung about in wreaths and coils, turning and twisting slowly in the
sunlight.  As the monoplane shot through it, I was aware of a faint
taste of oil upon my lips, and there was a greasy scum upon the
woodwork of the machine.  Some infinitely fine organic matter appeared
to be suspended in the atmosphere.  There was no life there.  It was
inchoate and diffuse, extending for many square acres and then fringing
off into the void.  No, it was not life.  But might it not be the
remains of life?  Above all, might it not be the food of life, of
monstrous life, even as the humble grease of the ocean is the food for
the mighty whale?  The thought was in my mind when my eyes looked
upwards and I saw the most wonderful vision that ever man has seen.
Can I hope to convey it to you even as I saw it myself last Thursday?

"Conceive a jelly-fish such as sails in our summer seas, bell-shaped
and of enormous size--far larger, I should judge, than the dome of St.
Paul's.  It was of a light pink colour veined with a delicate green,
but the whole huge fabric so tenuous that it was but a fairy outline
against the dark blue sky.  It pulsated with a delicate and regular
rhythm.  From it there depended two long, drooping, green tentacles,
which swayed slowly backwards and forwards.  This gorgeous vision
passed gently with noiseless dignity over my head, as light and fragile
as a soap-bubble, and drifted upon its stately way.

"I had half-turned my monoplane, that I might look after this beautiful
creature, when, in a moment, I found myself amidst a perfect fleet of
them, of all sizes, but none so large as the first.  Some were quite
small, but the majority about as big as an average balloon, and with
much the same curvature at the top. There was in them a delicacy of
texture and colouring which reminded me of the finest Venetian glass.
Pale shades of pink and green were the prevailing tints, but all had a
lovely iridescence where the sun shimmered through their dainty forms.
Some hundreds of them drifted past me, a wonderful fairy squadron of
strange unknown argosies of the sky--creatures whose forms and
substance were so attuned to these pure heights that one could not
conceive anything so delicate within actual sight or sound of earth.

"But soon my attention was drawn to a new phenomenon--the serpents of
the outer air.  These were long, thin, fantastic coils of vapour-like
material, which turned and twisted with great speed, flying round and
round at such a pace that the eyes could hardly follow them.  Some of
these ghost-like creatures were twenty or thirty feet long, but it was
difficult to tell their girth, for their outline was so hazy that it
seemed to fade away into the air around them.  These air-snakes were of
a very light grey or smoke colour, with some darker lines within, which
gave the impression of a definite organism.  One of them whisked past
my very face, and I was conscious of a cold, clammy contact, but their
composition was so unsubstantial that I could not connect them with any
thought of physical danger, any more than the beautiful bell-like
creatures which had preceded them.  There was no more solidity in their
frames than in the floating spume from a broken wave.

"But a more terrible experience was in store for me.  Floating
downwards from a great height there came a purplish patch of vapour,
small as I saw it first, but rapidly enlarging as it approached me,
until it appeared to be hundreds of square feet in size.  Though
fashioned of some transparent, jelly-like substance, it was none the
less of much more definite outline and solid consistence than anything
which I had seen before.  There were more traces, too, of a physical
organization, especially two vast, shadowy, circular plates upon either
side, which may have been eyes, and a perfectly solid white projection
between them which was as curved and cruel as the beak of a vulture.

"The whole aspect of this monster was formidable and threatening, and
it kept changing its colour from a very light mauve to a dark, angry
purple so thick that it cast a shadow as it drifted between my
monoplane and the sun.  On the upper curve of its huge body there were
three great projections which I can only describe as enormous bubbles,
and I was convinced as I looked at them that they were charged with
some extremely light gas which served to buoy up the misshapen and
semi-solid mass in the rarefied air.  The creature moved swiftly along,
keeping pace easily with the monoplane, and for twenty miles or more it
formed my horrible escort, hovering over me like a bird of prey which
is waiting to pounce.  Its method of progression--done so swiftly that
it was not easy to follow--was to throw out a long, glutinous streamer
in front of it, which in turn seemed to draw forward the rest of the
writhing body.  So elastic and gelatinous was it that never for two
successive minutes was it the same shape, and yet each change made it
more threatening and loathsome than the last.

"I knew that it meant mischief.  Every purple flush of its hideous body
told me so.  The vague, goggling eyes which were turned always upon me
were cold and merciless in their viscid hatred.  I dipped the nose of
my monoplane downwards to escape it. As I did so, as quick as a flash
there shot out a long tentacle from this mass of floating blubber, and
it fell as light and sinuous as a whip-lash across the front of my
machine.  There was a loud hiss as it lay for a moment across the hot
engine, and it whisked itself into the air again, while the huge, flat
body drew itself together as if in sudden pain.  I dipped to a
vol-pique, but again a tentacle fell over the monoplane and was shorn
off by the propeller as easily as it might have cut through a smoke
wreath. A long, gliding, sticky, serpent-like coil came from behind and
caught me round the waist, dragging me out of the fuselage.  I tore at
it, my fingers sinking into the smooth, glue-like surface, and for an
instant I disengaged myself, but only to be caught round the boot by
another coil, which gave me a jerk that tilted me almost on to my back.

"As I fell over I blazed off both barrels of my gun, though, indeed, it
was like attacking an elephant with a pea-shooter to imagine that any
human weapon could cripple that mighty bulk.  And yet I aimed better
than I knew, for, with a loud report, one of the great blisters upon
the creature's back exploded with the puncture of the buck-shot.  It
was very clear that my conjecture was right, and that these vast, clear
bladders were distended with some lifting gas, for in an instant the
huge, cloud-like body turned sideways, writhing desperately to find its
balance, while the white beak snapped and gaped in horrible fury.  But
already I had shot away on the steepest glide that I dared to attempt,
my engine still full on, the flying propeller and the force of gravity
shooting me downwards like an aerolite.  Far behind me I saw a dull,
purplish smudge growing swiftly smaller and merging into the blue sky
behind it.  I was safe out of the deadly jungle of the outer air.

"Once out of danger I throttled my engine, for nothing tears a machine
to pieces quicker than running on full power from a height. It was a
glorious, spiral vol-plane from nearly eight miles of altitude--first,
to the level of the silver cloud-bank, then to that of the storm-cloud
beneath it, and finally, in beating rain, to the surface of the earth.
I saw the Bristol Channel beneath me as I broke from the clouds, but,
having still some petrol in my tank, I got twenty miles inland before I
found myself stranded in a field half a mile from the village of
Ashcombe.  There I got three tins of petrol from a passing motor-car,
and at ten minutes past six that evening I alighted gently in my own
home meadow at Devizes, after such a journey as no mortal upon earth
has ever yet taken and lived to tell the tale.  I have seen the beauty
and I have seen the horror of the heights--and greater beauty or
greater horror than that is not within the ken of man.

"And now it is my plan to go once again before I give my results to the
world.  My reason for this is that I must surely have something to show
by way of proof before I lay such a tale before my fellow-men.  It is
true that others will soon follow and will confirm what I have said,
and yet I should wish to carry conviction from the first.  Those lovely
iridescent bubbles of the air should not be hard to capture.  They
drift slowly upon their way, and the swift monoplane could intercept
their leisurely course.  It is likely enough that they would dissolve
in the heavier layers of the atmosphere, and that some small heap of
amorphous jelly might be all that I should bring to earth with me. And
yet something there would surely be by which I could substantiate my
story.  Yes, I will go, even if I run a risk by doing so.  These purple
horrors would not seem to be numerous.  It is probable that I shall not
see one.  If I do I shall dive at once.  At the worst there is always
the shot-gun and my knowledge of ..."


Here a page of the manuscript is unfortunately missing.  On the next
page is written, in large, straggling writing:


"Forty-three thousand feet.  I shall never see earth again. They are
beneath me, three of them.  God help me; it is a dreadful death to die!"


Such in its entirety is the Joyce-Armstrong Statement.  Of the man
nothing has since been seen.  Pieces of his shattered monoplane have
been picked up in the preserves of Mr. Budd-Lushington upon the borders
of Kent and Sussex, within a few miles of the spot where the note-book
was discovered.  If the unfortunate aviator's theory is correct that
this air-jungle, as he called it, existed only over the south-west of
England, then it would seem that he had fled from it at the full speed
of his monoplane, but had been overtaken and devoured by these horrible
creatures at some spot in the outer atmosphere above the place where
the grim relics were found.  The picture of that monoplane skimming
down the sky, with the nameless terrors flying as swiftly beneath it
and cutting it off always from the earth while they gradually closed in
upon their victim, is one upon which a man who valued his sanity would
prefer not to dwell.  There are many, as I am aware, who still jeer at
the facts which I have here set down, but even they must admit that
Joyce-Armstrong has disappeared, and I would commend to them his own
words:  "This note-book may explain what I am trying to do, and how I
lost my life in doing it.  But no drivel about accidents or mysteries,
if YOU please."



The Leather Funnel

My friend, Lionel Dacre, lived in the Avenue de Wagram, Paris. His
house was that small one, with the iron railings and grass plot in
front of it, on the left-hand side as you pass down from the Arc de
Triomphe.  I fancy that it had been there long before the avenue was
constructed, for the grey tiles were stained with lichens, and the
walls were mildewed and discoloured with age.  It looked a small house
from the street, five windows in front, if I remember right, but it
deepened into a single long chamber at the back.  It was here that
Dacre had that singular library of occult literature, and the fantastic
curiosities which served as a hobby for himself, and an amusement for
his friends.  A wealthy man of refined and eccentric tastes, he had
spent much of his life and fortune in gathering together what was said
to be a unique private collection of Talmudic, cabalistic, and magical
works, many of them of great rarity and value.  His tastes leaned
toward the marvellous and the monstrous, and I have heard that his
experiments in the direction of the unknown have passed all the bounds
of civilization and of decorum.  To his English friends he never
alluded to such matters, and took the tone of the student and virtuoso;
but a Frenchman whose tastes were of the same nature has assured me
that the worst excesses of the black mass have been perpetrated in that
large and lofty hall, which is lined with the shelves of his books, and
the cases of his museum.

Dacre's appearance was enough to show that his deep interest in these
psychic matters was intellectual rather than spiritual. There was no
trace of asceticism upon his heavy face, but there was much mental
force in his huge, dome-like skull, which curved upward from amongst
his thinning locks, like a snowpeak above its fringe of fir trees.  His
knowledge was greater than his wisdom, and his powers were far superior
to his character.  The small bright eyes, buried deeply in his fleshy
face, twinkled with intelligence and an unabated curiosity of life, but
they were the eyes of a sensualist and an egotist.  Enough of the man,
for he is dead now, poor devil, dead at the very time that he had made
sure that he had at last discovered the elixir of life.  It is not with
his complex character that I have to deal, but with the very strange
and inexplicable incident which had its rise in my visit to him in the
early spring of the year '82.

I had known Dacre in England, for my researches in the Assyrian Room of
the British Museum had been conducted at the time when he was
endeavouring to establish a mystic and esoteric meaning in the
Babylonian tablets, and this community of interests had brought us
together.  Chance remarks had led to daily conversation, and that to
something verging upon friendship.  I had promised him that on my next
visit to Paris I would call upon him.  At the time when I was able to
fulfil my compact I was living in a cottage at Fontainebleau, and as
the evening trains were inconvenient, he asked me to spend the night in
his house.

"I have only that one spare couch," said he, pointing to a broad sofa
in his large salon; "I hope that you will manage to be comfortable
there."

It was a singular bedroom, with its high walls of brown volumes, but
there could be no more agreeable furniture to a bookworm like myself,
and there is no scent so pleasant to my nostrils as that faint, subtle
reek which comes from an ancient book.  I assured him that I could
desire no more charming chamber, and no more congenial surroundings.

"If the fittings are neither convenient nor conventional, they are at
least costly," said he, looking round at his shelves.  "I have expended
nearly a quarter of a million of money upon these objects which
surround you.  Books, weapons, gems, carvings, tapestries,
images--there is hardly a thing here which has not its history, and it
is generally one worth telling."

He was seated as he spoke at one side of the open fire-place, and I at
the other.  His reading-table was on his right, and the strong lamp
above it ringed it with a very vivid circle of golden light.  A
half-rolled palimpsest lay in the centre, and around it were many
quaint articles of bric-a-brac.  One of these was a large funnel, such
as is used for filling wine casks.  It appeared to be made of black
wood, and to be rimmed with discoloured brass.

"That is a curious thing," I remarked.  "What is the history of that?"

"Ah!" said he, "it is the very question which I have had occasion to
ask myself.  I would give a good deal to know.  Take it in your hands
and examine it."

I did so, and found that what I had imagined to be wood was in reality
leather, though age had dried it into an extreme hardness. It was a
large funnel, and might hold a quart when full.  The brass rim
encircled the wide end, but the narrow was also tipped with metal.

"What do you make of it?" asked Dacre.

"I should imagine that it belonged to some vintner or maltster in the
Middle Ages," said I.  "I have seen in England leathern drinking
flagons of the seventeenth century--'black jacks' as they were
called--which were of the same colour and hardness as this filler."

"I dare say the date would be about the same," said Dacre, "and, no
doubt, also, it was used for filling a vessel with liquid. If my
suspicions are correct, however, it was a queer vintner who used it,
and a very singular cask which was filled.  Do you observe nothing
strange at the spout end of the funnel."

As I held it to the light I observed that at a spot some five inches
above the brass tip the narrow neck of the leather funnel was all
haggled and scored, as if someone had notched it round with a blunt
knife.  Only at that point was there any roughening of the dead black
surface.

"Someone has tried to cut off the neck."

"Would you call it a cut?"

"It is torn and lacerated.  It must have taken some strength to leave
these marks on such tough material, whatever the instrument may have
been.  But what do you think of it?  I can tell that you know more than
you say."

Dacre smiled, and his little eyes twinkled with knowledge.

"Have you included the psychology of dreams among your learned
studies?" he asked.

"I did not even know that there was such a psychology."

"My dear sir, that shelf above the gem case is filled with volumes,
from Albertus Magnus onward, which deal with no other subject.  It is a
science in itself."

"A science of charlatans!"

"The charlatan is always the pioneer.  From the astrologer came the
astronomer, from the alchemist the chemist, from the mesmerist the
experimental psychologist.  The quack of yesterday is the professor of
tomorrow.  Even such subtle and elusive things as dreams will in time
be reduced to system and order.  When that time comes the researches of
our friends on the bookshelf yonder will no longer be the amusement of
the mystic, but the foundations of a science."

"Supposing that is so, what has the science of dreams to do with a
large, black, brass-rimmed funnel?"

"I will tell you.  You know that I have an agent who is always on the
look-out for rarities and curiosities for my collection. Some days ago
he heard of a dealer upon one of the Quais who had acquired some old
rubbish found in a cupboard in an ancient house at the back of the Rue
Mathurin, in the Quartier Latin.  The dining-room of this old house is
decorated with a coat of arms, chevrons, and bars rouge upon a field
argent, which prove, upon inquiry, to be the shield of Nicholas de la
Reynie, a high official of King Louis XIV.  There can be no doubt that
the other articles in the cupboard date back to the early days of that
king.  The inference is, therefore, that they were all the property of
this Nicholas de la Reynie, who was, as I understand, the gentleman
specially concerned with the maintenance and execution of the Draconic
laws of that epoch."

"What then?"

"I would ask you now to take the funnel into your hands once more and
to examine the upper brass rim.  Can you make out any lettering upon
it?"

There were certainly some scratches upon it, almost obliterated by
time.  The general effect was of several letters, the last of which
bore some resemblance to a B.

"You make it a B?"

"Yes, I do."

"So do I.  In fact, I have no doubt whatever that it is a B."

"But the nobleman you mentioned would have had R for his initial."

"Exactly!  That's the beauty of it.  He owned this curious object, and
yet he had someone else's initials upon it.  Why did he do this?"

"I can't imagine; can you?"

"Well, I might, perhaps, guess.  Do you observe something drawn a
little farther along the rim?"

"I should say it was a crown."

"It is undoubtedly a crown; but if you examine it in a good light, you
will convince yourself that it is not an ordinary crown. It is a
heraldic crown--a badge of rank, and it consists of an alternation of
four pearls and strawberry leaves, the proper badge of a marquis.  We
may infer, therefore, that the person whose initials end in B was
entitled to wear that coronet."

"Then this common leather filler belonged to a marquis?"

Dacre gave a peculiar smile.

"Or to some member of the family of a marquis," said he.  "So much we
have clearly gathered from this engraved rim."

"But what has all this to do with dreams?"  I do not know whether it
was from a look upon Dacre's face, or from some subtle suggestion in
his manner, but a feeling of repulsion, of unreasoning horror, came
upon me as I looked at the gnarled old lump of leather.

"I have more than once received important information through my
dreams," said my companion in the didactic manner which he loved to
affect.  "I make it a rule now when I am in doubt upon any material
point to place the article in question beside me as I sleep, and to
hope for some enlightenment.  The process does not appear to me to be
very obscure, though it has not yet received the blessing of orthodox
science.  According to my theory, any object which has been intimately
associated with any supreme paroxysm of human emotion, whether it be
joy or pain, will retain a certain atmosphere or association which it
is capable of communicating to a sensitive mind.  By a sensitive mind I
do not mean an abnormal one, but such a trained and educated mind as
you or I possess."

"You mean, for example, that if I slept beside that old sword upon the
wall, I might dream of some bloody incident in which that very sword
took part?"

"An excellent example, for, as a matter of fact, that sword was used in
that fashion by me, and I saw in my sleep the death of its owner, who
perished in a brisk skirmish, which I have been unable to identify, but
which occurred at the time of the wars of the Frondists.  If you think
of it, some of our popular observances show that the fact has already
been recognized by our ancestors, although we, in our wisdom, have
classed it among superstitions."

"For example?"

"Well, the placing of the bride's cake beneath the pillow in order that
the sleeper may have pleasant dreams.  That is one of several instances
which you will find set forth in a small brochure which I am myself
writing upon the subject.  But to come back to the point, I slept one
night with this funnel beside me, and I had a dream which certainly
throws a curious light upon its use and origin."

"What did you dream?"

"I dreamed----" He paused, and an intent look of interest came over his
massive face.  "By Jove, that's well thought of," said he. "This really
will be an exceedingly interesting experiment.  You are yourself a
psychic subject--with nerves which respond readily to any impression."

"I have never tested myself in that direction."

"Then we shall test you tonight.  Might I ask you as a very great
favour, when you occupy that couch tonight, to sleep with this old
funnel placed by the side of your pillow?"

The request seemed to me a grotesque one; but I have myself, in my
complex nature, a hunger after all which is bizarre and fantastic.  I
had not the faintest belief in Dacre's theory, nor any hopes for
success in such an experiment; yet it amused me that the experiment
should be made.  Dacre, with great gravity, drew a small stand to the
head of my settee, and placed the funnel upon it.  Then, after a short
conversation, he wished me good night and left me.


I sat for some little time smoking by the smouldering fire, and turning
over in my mind the curious incident which had occurred, and the
strange experience which might lie before me. Sceptical as I was, there
was something impressive in the assurance of Dacre's manner, and my
extraordinary surroundings, the huge room with the strange and often
sinister objects which were hung round it, struck solemnity into my
soul.  Finally I undressed, and turning out the lamp, I lay down.
After long tossing I fell asleep.  Let me try to describe as accurately
as I can the scene which came to me in my dreams.  It stands out now in
my memory more clearly than anything which I have seen with my waking
eyes.  There was a room which bore the appearance of a vault.  Four
spandrels from the corners ran up to join a sharp, cup-shaped roof.
The architecture was rough, but very strong.  It was evidently part of
a great building.

Three men in black, with curious, top-heavy, black velvet hats, sat in
a line upon a red-carpeted dais.  Their faces were very solemn and sad.
On the left stood two long-gowned men with port-folios in their hands,
which seemed to be stuffed with papers. Upon the right, looking toward
me, was a small woman with blonde hair and singular, light-blue
eyes--the eyes of a child. She was past her first youth, but could not
yet be called middle-aged. Her figure was inclined to stoutness and her
bearing was proud and confident.  Her face was pale, but serene.  It
was a curious face, comely and yet feline, with a subtle suggestion of
cruelty about the straight, strong little mouth and chubby jaw. She was
draped in some sort of loose, white gown.  Beside her stood a thin,
eager priest, who whispered in her ear, and continually raised a
crucifix before her eyes.  She turned her head and looked fixedly past
the crucifix at the three men in black, who were, I felt, her judges.

As I gazed the three men stood up and said something, but I could
distinguish no words, though I was aware that it was the central one
who was speaking.  They then swept out of the room, followed by the two
men with the papers.  At the same instant several rough-looking fellows
in stout jerkins came bustling in and removed first the red carpet, and
then the boards which formed the dais, so as to entirely clear the
room.  When this screen was removed I saw some singular articles of
furniture behind it.  One looked like a bed with wooden rollers at each
end, and a winch handle to regulate its length.  Another was a wooden
horse.  There were several other curious objects, and a number of
swinging cords which played over pulleys.  It was not unlike a modern
gymnasium.

When the room had been cleared there appeared a new figure upon the
scene.  This was a tall, thin person clad in black, with a gaunt and
austere face.  The aspect of the man made me shudder. His clothes were
all shining with grease and mottled with stains. He bore himself with a
slow and impressive dignity, as if he took command of all things from
the instant of his entrance.  In spite of his rude appearance and
sordid dress, it was now his business, his room, his to command.  He
carried a coil of light ropes over his left forearm.  The lady looked
him up and down with a searching glance, but her expression was
unchanged.  It was confident--even defiant.  But it was very different
with the priest.  His face was ghastly white, and I saw the moisture
glisten and run on his high, sloping forehead.  He threw up his hands
in prayer and he stooped continually to mutter frantic words in the
lady's ear.

The man in black now advanced, and taking one of the cords from his
left arm, he bound the woman's hands together.  She held them meekly
toward him as he did so.  Then he took her arm with a rough grip and
led her toward the wooden horse, which was little higher than her
waist.  On to this she was lifted and laid, with her back upon it, and
her face to the ceiling, while the priest, quivering with horror, had
rushed out of the room.  The woman's lips were moving rapidly, and
though I could hear nothing I knew that she was praying.  Her feet hung
down on either side of the horse, and I saw that the rough varlets in
attendance had fastened cords to her ankles and secured the other ends
to iron rings in the stone floor.

My heart sank within me as I saw these ominous preparations, and yet I
was held by the fascination of horror, and I could not take my eyes
from the strange spectacle.  A man had entered the room with a bucket
of water in either hand.  Another followed with a third bucket.  They
were laid beside the wooden horse.  The second man had a wooden
dipper--a bowl with a straight handle--in his other hand.  This he gave
to the man in black.  At the same moment one of the varlets approached
with a dark object in his hand, which even in my dream filled me with a
vague feeling of familiarity.  It was a leathern filler.  With horrible
energy he thrust it--but I could stand no more.  My hair stood on end
with horror.  I writhed, I struggled, I broke through the bonds of
sleep, and I burst with a shriek into my own life, and found myself
lying shivering with terror in the huge library, with the moonlight
flooding through the window and throwing strange silver and black
traceries upon the opposite wall.  Oh, what a blessed relief to feel
that I was back in the nineteenth century--back out of that mediaeval
vault into a world where men had human hearts within their bosoms.  I
sat up on my couch, trembling in every limb, my mind divided between
thankfulness and horror.  To think that such things were ever
done--that they could be done without God striking the villains dead.
Was it all a fantasy, or did it really stand for something which had
happened in the black, cruel days of the world's history?  I sank my
throbbing head upon my shaking hands.  And then, suddenly, my heart
seemed to stand still in my bosom, and I could not even scream, so
great was my terror. Something was advancing toward me through the
darkness of the room.

It is a horror coming upon a horror which breaks a man's spirit.  I
could not reason, I could not pray; I could only sit like a frozen
image, and glare at the dark figure which was coming down the great
room.  And then it moved out into the white lane of moonlight, and I
breathed once more.  It was Dacre, and his face showed that he was as
frightened as myself.

"Was that you?  For God's sake what's the matter?" he asked in a husky
voice.

"Oh, Dacre, I am glad to see you!  I have been down into hell. It was
dreadful."

"Then it was you who screamed?"

"I dare say it was."

"It rang through the house.  The servants are all terrified." He struck
a match and lit the lamp.  "I think we may get the fire to burn up
again," he added, throwing some logs upon the embers. "Good God, my
dear chap, how white you are!  You look as if you had seen a ghost."

"So I have--several ghosts."

"The leather funnel has acted, then?"

"I wouldn't sleep near the infernal thing again for all the money you
could offer me."

Dacre chuckled.

"I expected that you would have a lively night of it," said he. "You
took it out of me in return, for that scream of yours wasn't a very
pleasant sound at two in the morning.  I suppose from what you say that
you have seen the whole dreadful business."

"What dreadful business?"

"The torture of the water--the 'Extraordinary Question,' as it was
called in the genial days of 'Le Roi Soleil.'  Did you stand it out to
the end?"

"No, thank God, I awoke before it really began."

"Ah!  it is just as well for you.  I held out till the third bucket.
Well, it is an old story, and they are all in their graves now, anyhow,
so what does it matter how they got there?  I suppose that you have no
idea what it was that you have seen?"

"The torture of some criminal.  She must have been a terrible
malefactor indeed if her crimes are in proportion to her penalty."

"Well, we have that small consolation," said Dacre, wrapping his
dressing-gown round him and crouching closer to the fire. "They WERE in
proportion to her penalty.  That is to say, if I am correct in the
lady's identity."

"How could you possibly know her identity?"

For answer Dacre took down an old vellum-covered volume from the shelf.

"Just listen to this," said he; "it is in the French of the seventeenth
century, but I will give a rough translation as I go. You will judge
for yourself whether I have solved the riddle or not.

"'The prisoner was brought before the Grand Chambers and Tournelles of
Parliament, sitting as a court of justice, charged with the murder of
Master Dreux d'Aubray, her father, and of her two brothers, MM.
d'Aubray, one being civil lieutenant, and the other a counsellor of
Parliament.  In person it seemed hard to believe that she had really
done such wicked deeds, for she was of a mild appearance, and of short
stature, with a fair skin and blue eyes.  Yet the Court, having found
her guilty, condemned her to the ordinary and to the extraordinary
question in order that she might be forced to name her accomplices,
after which she should be carried in a cart to the Place de Greve,
there to have her head cut off, her body being afterwards burned and
her ashes scattered to the winds.'

"The date of this entry is July 16, 1676."

"It is interesting," said I, "but not convincing.  How do you prove the
two women to be the same?"

"I am coming to that.  The narrative goes on to tell of the woman's
behaviour when questioned.  'When the executioner approached her she
recognized him by the cords which he held in his hands, and she at once
held out her own hands to him, looking at him from head to foot without
uttering a word.'  How's that?"

"Yes, it was so."

"'She gazed without wincing upon the wooden horse and rings which had
twisted so many limbs and caused so many shrieks of agony.  When her
eyes fell upon the three pails of water, which were all ready for her,
she said with a smile, "All that water must have been brought here for
the purpose of drowning me, Monsieur.  You have no idea, I trust, of
making a person of my small stature swallow it all."'  Shall I read the
details of the torture?"

"No, for Heaven's sake, don't."

"Here is a sentence which must surely show you that what is here
recorded is the very scene which you have gazed upon tonight: 'The good
Abbe Pirot, unable to contemplate the agonies which were suffered by
his penitent, had hurried from the room.'  Does that convince you?"

"It does entirely.  There can be no question that it is indeed the same
event.  But who, then, is this lady whose appearance was so attractive
and whose end was so horrible?"

For answer Dacre came across to me, and placed the small lamp upon the
table which stood by my bed.  Lifting up the ill-omened filler, he
turned the brass rim so that the light fell full upon it.  Seen in this
way the engraving seemed clearer than on the night before.

"We have already agreed that this is the badge of a marquis or of a
marquise," said he.  "We have also settled that the last letter is B."

"It is undoubtedly so."

"I now suggest to you that the other letters from left to right are, M,
M, a small d, A, a small d, and then the final B."

"Yes, I am sure that you are right.  I can make out the two small d's
quite plainly."

"What I have read to you tonight," said Dacre, "is the official record
of the trial of Marie Madeleine d'Aubray, Marquise de Brinvilliers, one
of the most famous poisoners and murderers of all time."

I sat in silence, overwhelmed at the extraordinary nature of the
incident, and at the completeness of the proof with which Dacre had
exposed its real meaning.  In a vague way I remembered some details of
the woman's career, her unbridled debauchery, the cold-blooded and
protracted torture of her sick father, the murder of her brothers for
motives of petty gain.  I recollected also that the bravery of her end
had done something to atone for the horror of her life, and that all
Paris had sympathized with her last moments, and blessed her as a
martyr within a few days of the time when they had cursed her as a
murderess.  One objection, and one only, occurred to my mind.

"How came her initials and her badge of rank upon the filler? Surely
they did not carry their mediaeval homage to the nobility to the point
of decorating instruments of torture with their titles?"

"I was puzzled with the same point," said Dacre, "but it admits of a
simple explanation.  The case excited extraordinary interest at the
time, and nothing could be more natural than that La Reynie, the head
of the police, should retain this filler as a grim souvenir.  It was
not often that a marchioness of France underwent the extraordinary
question.  That he should engrave her initials upon it for the
information of others was surely a very ordinary proceeding upon his
part."

"And this?" I asked, pointing to the marks upon the leathern neck.

"She was a cruel tigress," said Dacre, as he turned away.  "I think it
is evident that like other tigresses her teeth were both strong and
sharp."



The New Catacomb

"Look here, Burger," said Kennedy, "I do wish that you would confide in
me."

The two famous students of Roman remains sat together in Kennedy's
comfortable room overlooking the Corso.  The night was cold, and they
had both pulled up their chairs to the unsatisfactory Italian stove
which threw out a zone of stuffiness rather than of warmth.  Outside
under the bright winter stars lay the modern Rome, the long, double
chain of the electric lamps, the brilliantly lighted cafes, the rushing
carriages, and the dense throng upon the footpaths.  But inside, in the
sumptuous chamber of the rich young English archaeologist, there was
only old Rome to be seen.  Cracked and timeworn friezes hung upon the
walls, grey old busts of senators and soldiers with their fighting
heads and their hard, cruel faces peered out from the corners.  On the
centre table, amidst a litter of inscriptions, fragments, and
ornaments, there stood the famous reconstruction by Kennedy of the
Baths of Caracalla, which excited such interest and admiration when it
was exhibited in Berlin.  Amphorae hung from the ceiling, and a litter
of curiosities strewed the rich red Turkey carpet.  And of them all
there was not one which was not of the most unimpeachable authenticity,
and of the utmost rarity and value; for Kennedy, though little more
than thirty, had a European reputation in this particular branch of
research, and was, moreover, provided with that long purse which either
proves to be a fatal handicap to the student's energies, or, if his
mind is still true to its purpose, gives him an enormous advantage in
the race for fame.  Kennedy had often been seduced by whim and pleasure
from his studies, but his mind was an incisive one, capable of long and
concentrated efforts which ended in sharp reactions of sensuous
languor.  His handsome face, with its high, white forehead, its
aggressive nose, and its somewhat loose and sensual mouth, was a fair
index of the compromise between strength and weakness in his nature.

Of a very different type was his companion, Julius Burger.  He came of
a curious blend, a German father and an Italian mother, with the robust
qualities of the North mingling strangely with the softer graces of the
South.  Blue Teutonic eyes lightened his sun-browned face, and above
them rose a square, massive forehead, with a fringe of close yellow
curls lying round it.  His strong, firm jaw was clean-shaven, and his
companion had frequently remarked how much it suggested those old Roman
busts which peered out from the shadows in the corners of his chamber.
Under its bluff German strength there lay always a suggestion of
Italian subtlety, but the smile was so honest, and the eyes so frank,
that one understood that this was only an indication of his ancestry,
with no actual bearing upon his character.  In age and in reputation,
he was on the same level as his English companion, but his life and his
work had both been far more arduous.  Twelve years before, he had come
as a poor student to Rome, and had lived ever since upon some small
endowment for research which had been awarded to him by the University
of Bonn.  Painfully, slowly, and doggedly, with extraordinary tenacity
and single-mindedness, he had climbed from rung to rung of the ladder
of fame, until now he was a member of the Berlin Academy, and there was
every reason to believe that he would shortly be promoted to the Chair
of the greatest of German Universities.  But the singleness of purpose
which had brought him to the same high level as the rich and brilliant
Englishman, had caused him in everything outside their work to stand
infinitely below him.  He had never found a pause in his studies in
which to cultivate the social graces.  It was only when he spoke of his
own subject that his face was filled with life and soul.  At other
times he was silent and embarrassed, too conscious of his own
limitations in larger subjects, and impatient of that small talk which
is the conventional refuge of those who have no thoughts to express.

And yet for some years there had been an acquaintanceship which
appeared to be slowly ripening into a friendship between these two very
different rivals.  The base and origin of this lay in the fact that in
their own studies each was the only one of the younger men who had
knowledge and enthusiasm enough to properly appreciate the other.
Their common interests and pursuits had brought them together, and each
had been attracted by the other's knowledge. And then gradually
something had been added to this.  Kennedy had been amused by the
frankness and simplicity of his rival, while Burger in turn had been
fascinated by the brilliancy and vivacity which had made Kennedy such a
favourite in Roman society.  I say "had," because just at the moment
the young Englishman was somewhat under a cloud.  A love-affair, the
details of which had never quite come out, had indicated a
heartlessness and callousness upon his part which shocked many of his
friends.  But in the bachelor circles of students and artists in which
he preferred to move there is no very rigid code of honour in such
matters, and though a head might be shaken or a pair of shoulders
shrugged over the flight of two and the return of one, the general
sentiment was probably one of curiosity and perhaps of envy rather than
of reprobation.

"Look here, Burger," said Kennedy, looking hard at the placid face of
his companion, "I do wish that you would confide in me."

As he spoke he waved his hand in the direction of a rug which lay upon
the floor.  On the rug stood a long, shallow fruit-basket of the light
wicker-work which is used in the Campagna, and this was heaped with a
litter of objects, inscribed tiles, broken inscriptions, cracked
mosaics, torn papyri, rusty metal ornaments, which to the uninitiated
might have seemed to have come straight from a dustman's bin, but which
a specialist would have speedily recognized as unique of their kind.
The pile of odds and ends in the flat wicker-work basket supplied
exactly one of those missing links of social development which are of
such interest to the student.  It was the German who had brought them
in, and the Englishman's eyes were hungry as he looked at them.

"I won't interfere with your treasure-trove, but I should very much
like to hear about it," he continued, while Burger very deliberately
lit a cigar.  "It is evidently a discovery of the first importance.
These inscriptions will make a sensation throughout Europe."

"For every one here there are a million there!" said the German.
"There are so many that a dozen savants might spend a lifetime over
them, and build up a reputation as solid as the Castle of St. Angelo."

Kennedy sat thinking with his fine forehead wrinkled and his fingers
playing with his long, fair moustache.

"You have given yourself away, Burger!" said he at last.  "Your words
can only apply to one thing.  You have discovered a new catacomb."

"I had no doubt that you had already come to that conclusion from an
examination of these objects."

"Well, they certainly appeared to indicate it, but your last remarks
make it certain.  There is no place except a catacomb which could
contain so vast a store of relics as you describe."

"Quite so.  There is no mystery about that.  I HAVE discovered a new
catacomb."

"Where?"

"Ah, that is my secret, my dear Kennedy.  Suffice it that it is so
situated that there is not one chance in a million of anyone else
coming upon it.  Its date is different from that of any known catacomb,
and it has been reserved for the burial of the highest Christians, so
that the remains and the relics are quite different from anything which
has ever been seen before.  If I was not aware of your knowledge and of
your energy, my friend, I would not hesitate, under the pledge of
secrecy, to tell you everything about it.  But as it is I think that I
must certainly prepare my own report of the matter before I expose
myself to such formidable competition."

Kennedy loved his subject with a love which was almost a mania--a love
which held him true to it, amidst all the distractions which come to a
wealthy and dissipated young man.  He had ambition, but his ambition
was secondary to his mere abstract joy and interest in everything which
concerned the old life and history of the city.  He yearned to see this
new underworld which his companion had discovered.

"Look here, Burger," said he, earnestly, "I assure you that you can
trust me most implicitly in the matter.  Nothing would induce me to put
pen to paper about anything which I see until I have your express
permission.  I quite understand your feeling and I think it is most
natural, but you have really nothing whatever to fear from me.  On the
other hand, if you don't tell me I shall make a systematic search, and
I shall most certainly discover it.  In that case, of course, I should
make what use I liked of it, since I should be under no obligation to
you."

Burger smiled thoughtfully over his cigar.

"I have noticed, friend Kennedy," said he, "that when I want
information over any point you are not always so ready to supply it."

"When did you ever ask me anything that I did not tell you? You
remember, for example, my giving you the material for your paper about
the temple of the Vestals."

"Ah, well, that was not a matter of much importance.  If I were to
question you upon some intimate thing would you give me an answer, I
wonder!  This new catacomb is a very intimate thing to me, and I should
certainly expect some sign of confidence in return."

"What you are driving at I cannot imagine," said the Englishman, "but
if you mean that you will answer my question about the catacomb if I
answer any question which you may put to me I can assure you that I
will certainly do so."

"Well, then," said Burger, leaning luxuriously back in his settee, and
puffing a blue tree of cigar-smoke into the air, "tell me all about
your relations with Miss Mary Saunderson."

Kennedy sprang up in his chair and glared angrily at his impassive
companion.

"What the devil do you mean?" he cried.  "What sort of a question is
this?  You may mean it as a joke, but you never made a worse one."

"No, I don't mean it as a joke," said Burger, simply.  "I am really
rather interested in the details of the matter.  I don't know much
about the world and women and social life and that sort of thing, and
such an incident has the fascination of the unknown for me.  I know
you, and I knew her by sight--I had even spoken to her once or twice.
I should very much like to hear from your own lips exactly what it was
which occurred between you."

"I won't tell you a word."

"That's all right.  It was only my whim to see if you would give up a
secret as easily as you expected me to give up my secret of the new
catacomb.  You wouldn't, and I didn't expect you to. But why should you
expect otherwise of me?  There's Saint John's clock striking ten.  It
is quite time that I was going home."

"No; wait a bit, Burger," said Kennedy; "this is really a ridiculous
caprice of yours to wish to know about an old love-affair which has
burned out months ago.  You know we look upon a man who kisses and
tells as the greatest coward and villain possible."

"Certainly," said the German, gathering up his basket of curiosities,
"when he tells anything about a girl which is previously unknown he
must be so.  But in this case, as you must be aware, it was a public
matter which was the common talk of Rome, so that you are not really
doing Miss Mary Saunderson any injury by discussing her case with me.
But still, I respect your scruples; and so good night!"

"Wait a bit, Burger," said Kennedy, laying his hand upon the other's
arm; "I am very keen upon this catacomb business, and I can't let it
drop quite so easily.  Would you mind asking me something else in
return--something not quite so eccentric this time?"

"No, no; you have refused, and there is an end of it," said Burger,
with his basket on his arm.  "No doubt you are quite right not to
answer, and no doubt I am quite right also--and so again, my dear
Kennedy, good night!"

The Englishman watched Burger cross the room, and he had his hand on
the handle of the door before his host sprang up with the air of a man
who is making the best of that which cannot be helped.

"Hold on, old fellow," said he; "I think you are behaving in a most
ridiculous fashion; but still; if this is your condition, I suppose
that I must submit to it.  I hate saying anything about a girl, but, as
you say, it is all over Rome, and I don't suppose I can tell you
anything which you do not know already.  What was it you wanted to
know?"

The German came back to the stove, and, laying down his basket, he sank
into his chair once more.

"May I have another cigar?" said he.  "Thank you very much!  I never
smoke when I work, but I enjoy a chat much more when I am under the
influence of tobacco.  Now, as regards this young lady, with whom you
had this little adventure.  What in the world has become of her?"

"She is at home with her own people."

"Oh, really--in England?"

"Yes."

"What part of England--London?"

"No, Twickenham."

"You must excuse my curiosity, my dear Kennedy, and you must put it
down to my ignorance of the world.  No doubt it is quite a simple thing
to persuade a young lady to go off with you for three weeks or so, and
then to hand her over to her own family at--what did you call the
place?"

"Twickenham."

"Quite so--at Twickenham.  But it is something so entirely outside my
own experience that I cannot even imagine how you set about it.  For
example, if you had loved this girl your love could hardly disappear in
three weeks, so I presume that you could not have loved her at all.
But if you did not love her why should you make this great scandal
which has damaged you and ruined her?"

Kennedy looked moodily into the red eye of the stove.

"That's a logical way of looking at it, certainly," said he. "Love is a
big word, and it represents a good many different shades of feeling.  I
liked her, and--well, you say you've seen her--you know how charming
she could look.  But still I am willing to admit, looking back, that I
could never have really loved her."

"Then, my dear Kennedy, why did you do it?"

"The adventure of the thing had a great deal to do with it."

"What!  You are so fond of adventures!"

"Where would the variety of life be without them?  It was for an
adventure that I first began to pay my attentions to her.  I've chased
a good deal of game in my time, but there's no chase like that of a
pretty woman.  There was the piquant difficulty of it also, for, as she
was the companion of Lady Emily Rood, it was almost impossible to see
her alone.  On the top of all the other obstacles which attracted me, I
learned from her own lips very early in the proceedings that she was
engaged."

"Mein Gott!  To whom?"

"She mentioned no names."

"I do not think that anyone knows that.  So that made the adventure
more alluring, did it?"

"Well, it did certainly give a spice to it.  Don't you think so?"

"I tell you that I am very ignorant about these things."

"My dear fellow, you can remember that the apple you stole from your
neighbour's tree was always sweeter than that which fell from your own.
And then I found that she cared for me."

"What--at once?"

"Oh, no, it took about three months of sapping and mining.  But at last
I won her over.  She understood that my judicial separation from my
wife made it impossible for me to do the right thing by her--but she
came all the same, and we had a delightful time, as long as it lasted."

"But how about the other man?"

Kennedy shrugged his shoulders.

"I suppose it is the survival of the fittest," said he.  "If he had
been the better man she would not have deserted him.  Let's drop the
subject, for I have had enough of it!"

"Only one other thing.  How did you get rid of her in three weeks?"

"Well, we had both cooled down a bit, you understand.  She absolutely
refused, under any circumstances, to come back to face the people she
had known in Rome.  Now, of course, Rome is necessary to me, and I was
already pining to be back at my work--so there was one obvious cause of
separation.  Then, again, her old father turned up at the hotel in
London, and there was a scene, and the whole thing became so unpleasant
that really--though I missed her dreadfully at first--I was very glad
to slip out of it.  Now, I rely upon you not to repeat anything of what
I have said."

"My dear Kennedy, I should not dream of repeating it.  But all that you
say interests me very much, for it gives me an insight into your way of
looking at things, which is entirely different from mine, for I have
seen so little of life.  And now you want to know about my new
catacomb.  There's no use my trying to describe it, for you would never
find it by that.  There is only one thing, and that is for me to take
you there."

"That would be splendid."

"When would you like to come?"

"The sooner the better.  I am all impatience to see it."

"Well, it is a beautiful night--though a trifle cold.  Suppose we start
in an hour.  We must be very careful to keep the matter to ourselves.
If anyone saw us hunting in couples they would suspect that there was
something going on."

"We can't be too cautious," said Kennedy.  "Is it far?"

"Some miles."

"Not too far to walk?"

"Oh, no, we could walk there easily."

"We had better do so, then.  A cabman's suspicions would be aroused if
he dropped us both at some lonely spot in the dead of the night."

"Quite so.  I think it would be best for us to meet at the Gate of the
Appian Way at midnight.  I must go back to my lodgings for the matches
and candles and things."

"All right, Burger!  I think it is very kind of you to let me into this
secret, and I promise you that I will write nothing about it until you
have published your report.  Good-bye for the present! You will find me
at the Gate at twelve."

The cold, clear air was filled with the musical chimes from that city
of clocks as Burger, wrapped in an Italian overcoat, with a lantern
hanging from his hand, walked up to the rendezvous. Kennedy stepped out
of the shadow to meet him.

"You are ardent in work as well as in love!" said the German, laughing.

"Yes; I have been waiting here for nearly half an hour."

"I hope you left no clue as to where we were going."

"Not such a fool!  By Jove, I am chilled to the bone!  Come on, Burger,
let us warm ourselves by a spurt of hard walking."

Their footsteps sounded loud and crisp upon the rough stone paving of
the disappointing road which is all that is left of the most famous
highway of the world.  A peasant or two going home from the wine-shop,
and a few carts of country produce coming up to Rome, were the only
things which they met.  They swung along, with the huge tombs looming
up through the darkness upon each side of them, until they had come as
far as the Catacombs of St. Calistus, and saw against a rising moon the
great circular bastion of Cecilia Metella in front of them.  Then
Burger stopped with his hand to his side.

"Your legs are longer than mine, and you are more accustomed to
walking," said he, laughing.  "I think that the place where we turn off
is somewhere here.  Yes, this is it, round the corner of the trattoria.
Now, it is a very narrow path, so perhaps I had better go in front and
you can follow."

He had lit his lantern, and by its light they were enabled to follow a
narrow and devious track which wound across the marshes of the
Campagna.  The great Aqueduct of old Rome lay like a monstrous
caterpillar across the moonlit landscape, and their road led them under
one of its huge arches, and past the circle of crumbling bricks which
marks the old arena.  At last Burger stopped at a solitary wooden
cow-house, and he drew a key from his pocket. "Surely your catacomb is
not inside a house!" cried Kennedy.

"The entrance to it is.  That is just the safeguard which we have
against anyone else discovering it."

"Does the proprietor know of it?"

"Not he.  He had found one or two objects which made me almost certain
that his house was built on the entrance to such a place. So I rented
it from him, and did my excavations for myself.  Come in, and shut the
door behind you."

It was a long, empty building, with the mangers of the cows along one
wall.  Burger put his lantern down on the ground, and shaded its light
in all directions save one by draping his overcoat round it.

"It might excite remark if anyone saw a light in this lonely place,"
said he.  "Just help me to move this boarding."

The flooring was loose in the corner, and plank by plank the two
savants raised it and leaned it against the wall.  Below there was a
square aperture and a stair of old stone steps which led away down into
the bowels of the earth.

"Be careful!" cried Burger, as Kennedy, in his impatience, hurried down
them.  "It is a perfect rabbits'-warren below, and if you were once to
lose your way there the chances would be a hundred to one against your
ever coming out again.  Wait until I bring the light."

"How do you find your own way if it is so complicated?"

"I had some very narrow escapes at first, but I have gradually learned
to go about.  There is a certain system to it, but it is one which a
lost man, if he were in the dark, could not possibly find out.  Even
now I always spin out a ball of string behind me when I am going far
into the catacomb.  You can see for yourself that it is difficult, but
every one of these passages divides and subdivides a dozen times before
you go a hundred yards."

They had descended some twenty feet from the level of the byre, and
they were standing now in a square chamber cut out of the soft tufa.
The lantern cast a flickering light, bright below and dim above, over
the cracked brown walls.  In every direction were the black openings of
passages which radiated from this common centre.

"I want you to follow me closely, my friend," said Burger.  "Do not
loiter to look at anything upon the way, for the place to which I will
take you contains all that you can see, and more.  It will save time
for us to go there direct."

He led the way down one of the corridors, and the Englishman followed
closely at his heels.  Every now and then the passage bifurcated, but
Burger was evidently following some secret marks of his own, for he
neither stopped nor hesitated.  Everywhere along the walls, packed like
the berths upon an emigrant ship, lay the Christians of old Rome.  The
yellow light flickered over the shrivelled features of the mummies, and
gleamed upon rounded skulls and long, white armbones crossed over
fleshless chests.  And everywhere as he passed Kennedy looked with
wistful eyes upon inscriptions, funeral vessels, pictures, vestments,
utensils, all lying as pious hands had placed them so many centuries
ago.  It was apparent to him, even in those hurried, passing glances,
that this was the earliest and finest of the catacombs, containing such
a storehouse of Roman remains as had never before come at one time
under the observation of the student.

"What would happen if the light went out?" he asked, as they hurried
onwards.

"I have a spare candle and a box of matches in my pocket.  By the way,
Kennedy, have you any matches?"

"No; you had better give me some."

"Oh, that is all right.  There is no chance of our separating."

"How far are we going?  It seems to me that we have walked at least a
quarter of a mile."

"More than that, I think.  There is really no limit to the tombs--at
least, I have never been able to find any.  This is a very difficult
place, so I think that I will use our ball of string."

He fastened one end of it to a projecting stone and he carried the coil
in the breast of his coat, paying it out as he advanced. Kennedy saw
that it was no unnecessary precaution, for the passages had become more
complex and tortuous than ever, with a perfect network of intersecting
corridors.  But these all ended in one large circular hall with a
square pedestal of tufa topped with a slab of marble at one end of it.

"By Jove!" cried Kennedy in an ecstasy, as Burger swung his lantern
over the marble.  "It is a Christian altar--probably the first one in
existence.  Here is the little consecration cross cut upon the corner
of it.  No doubt this circular space was used as a church."

"Precisely," said Burger.  "If I had more time I should like to show
you all the bodies which are buried in these niches upon the walls, for
they are the early popes and bishops of the Church, with their mitres,
their croziers, and full canonicals.  Go over to that one and look at
it!"

Kennedy went across, and stared at the ghastly head which lay loosely
on the shredded and mouldering mitre.

"This is most interesting," said he, and his voice seemed to boom
against the concave vault.  "As far as my experience goes, it is
unique.  Bring the lantern over, Burger, for I want to see them all."

But the German had strolled away, and was standing in the middle of a
yellow circle of light at the other side of the hall.

"Do you know how many wrong turnings there are between this and the
stairs?" he asked.  "There are over two thousand.  No doubt it was one
of the means of protection which the Christians adopted. The odds are
two thousand to one against a man getting out, even if he had a light;
but if he were in the dark it would, of course, be far more difficult."

"So I should think."

"And the darkness is something dreadful.  I tried it once for an
experiment.  Let us try it again!"  He stooped to the lantern, and in
an instant it was as if an invisible hand was squeezed tightly over
each of Kennedy's eyes.  Never had he known what such darkness was.  It
seemed to press upon him and to smother him.  It was a solid obstacle
against which the body shrank from advancing. He put his hands out to
push it back from him.

"That will do, Burger," said he, "let's have the light again."

But his companion began to laugh, and in that circular room the sound
seemed to come from every side at once.

"You seem uneasy, friend Kennedy," said he.

"Go on, man, light the candle!" said Kennedy impatiently.

"It's very strange, Kennedy, but I could not in the least tell by the
sound in which direction you stand.  Could you tell where I am?"

"No; you seem to be on every side of me."

"If it were not for this string which I hold in my hand I should not
have a notion which way to go."

"I dare say not.  Strike a light, man, and have an end of this
nonsense."

"Well, Kennedy, there are two things which I understand that you are
very fond of.  The one is an adventure, and the other is an obstacle to
surmount.  The adventure must be the finding of your way out of this
catacomb.  The obstacle will be the darkness and the two thousand wrong
turns which make the way a little difficult to find.  But you need not
hurry, for you have plenty of time, and when you halt for a rest now
and then, I should like you just to think of Miss Mary Saunderson, and
whether you treated her quite fairly."

"You devil, what do you mean?" roared Kennedy.  He was running about in
little circles and clasping at the solid blackness with both hands.

"Good-bye," said the mocking voice, and it was already at some
distance.  "I really do not think, Kennedy, even by your own showing
that you did the right thing by that girl.  There was only one little
thing which you appeared not to know, and I can supply it.  Miss
Saunderson was engaged to a poor ungainly devil of a student, and his
name was Julius Burger."

There was a rustle somewhere, the vague sound of a foot striking a
stone, and then there fell silence upon that old Christian church--a
stagnant, heavy silence which closed round Kennedy and shut him in like
water round a drowning man.


Some two months afterwards the following paragraph made the round of
the European Press:


"One of the most interesting discoveries of recent years is that of the
new catacomb in Rome, which lies some distance to the east of the
well-known vaults of St. Calixtus.  The finding of this important
burial-place, which is exceeding rich in most interesting early
Christian remains, is due to the energy and sagacity of Dr. Julius
Burger, the young German specialist, who is rapidly taking the first
place as an authority upon ancient Rome. Although the first to publish
his discovery, it appears that a less fortunate adventurer had
anticipated Dr. Burger.  Some months ago Mr. Kennedy, the well-known
English student, disappeared suddenly from his rooms in the Corso, and
it was conjectured that his association with a recent scandal had
driven him to leave Rome.  It appears now that he had in reality fallen
a victim to that fervid love of archaeology which had raised him to a
distinguished place among living scholars.  His body was discovered in
the heart of the new catacomb, and it was evident from the condition of
his feet and boots that he had tramped for days through the tortuous
corridors which make these subterranean tombs so dangerous to
explorers.  The deceased gentleman had, with inexplicable rashness,
made his way into this labyrinth without, as far as can be discovered,
taking with him either candles or matches, so that his sad fate was the
natural result of his own temerity.  What makes the matter more painful
is that Dr. Julius Burger was an intimate friend of the deceased.  His
joy at the extraordinary find which he has been so fortunate as to make
has been greatly marred by the terrible fate of his comrade and
fellow-worker."



The Case of Lady Sannox

The relations between Douglas Stone and the notorious Lady Sannox were
very well known both among the fashionable circles of which she was a
brilliant member, and the scientific bodies which numbered him among
their most illustrious confreres.  There was naturally, therefore, a
very widespread interest when it was announced one morning that the
lady had absolutely and for ever taken the veil, and that the world
would see her no more.  When, at the very tail of this rumour, there
came the assurance that the celebrated operating surgeon, the man of
steel nerves, had been found in the morning by his valet, seated on one
side of his bed, smiling pleasantly upon the universe, with both legs
jammed into one side of his breeches and his great brain about as
valuable as a cap full of porridge, the matter was strong enough to
give quite a little thrill of interest to folk who had never hoped that
their jaded nerves were capable of such a sensation.

Douglas Stone in his prime was one of the most remarkable men in
England.  Indeed, he could hardly be said to have ever reached his
prime, for he was but nine-and-thirty at the time of this little
incident.  Those who knew him best were aware that famous as he was as
a surgeon, he might have succeeded with even greater rapidity in any of
a dozen lines of life.  He could have cut his way to fame as a soldier,
struggled to it as an explorer, bullied for it in the courts, or built
it out of stone and iron as an engineer.  He was born to be great, for
he could plan what another man dare not do, and he could do what
another man dare not plan. In surgery none could follow him.  His
nerve, his judgement, his intuition, were things apart.  Again and
again his knife cut away death, but grazed the very springs of life in
doing it, until his assistants were as white as the patient.  His
energy, his audacity, his full-blooded self-confidence--does not the
memory of them still linger to the south of Marylebone Road and the
north of Oxford Street?

His vices were as magnificent as his virtues, and infinitely more
picturesque.  Large as was his income, and it was the third largest of
all professional men in London, it was far beneath the luxury of his
living.  Deep in his complex nature lay a rich vein of sensualism, at
the sport of which he placed all the prizes of his life.  The eye, the
ear, the touch, the palate, all were his masters.  The bouquet of old
vintages, the scent of rare exotics, the curves and tints of the
daintiest potteries of Europe, it was to these that the quick-running
stream of gold was transformed. And then there came his sudden mad
passion for Lady Sannox, when a single interview with two challenging
glances and a whispered word set him ablaze.  She was the loveliest
woman in London and the only one to him.  He was one of the handsomest
men in London, but not the only one to her.  She had a liking for new
experiences, and was gracious to most men who wooed her.  It may have
been cause or it may have been effect that Lord Sannox looked fifty,
though he was but six-and-thirty.

He was a quiet, silent, neutral-tinted man, this lord, with thin lips
and heavy eyelids, much given to gardening, and full of home-like
habits.  He had at one time been fond of acting, had even rented a
theatre in London, and on its boards had first seen Miss Marion Dawson,
to whom he had offered his hand, his title, and the third of a county.
Since his marriage his early hobby had become distasteful to him.  Even
in private theatricals it was no longer possible to persuade him to
exercise the talent which he had often showed that he possessed.  He
was happier with a spud and a watering-can among his orchids and
chrysanthemums.

It was quite an interesting problem whether he was absolutely devoid of
sense, or miserably wanting in spirit.  Did he know his lady's ways and
condone them, or was he a mere blind, doting fool? It was a point to be
discussed over the teacups in snug little drawing-rooms, or with the
aid of a cigar in the bow windows of clubs.  Bitter and plain were the
comments among men upon his conduct.  There was but one who had a good
word to say for him, and he was the most silent member in the
smoking-room.  He had seen him break in a horse at the University, and
it seemed to have left an impression upon his mind.

But when Douglas Stone became the favourite all doubts as to Lord
Sannox's knowledge or ignorance were set for ever at rest. There was no
subterfuge about Stone.  In his high-handed, impetuous fashion, he set
all caution and discretion at defiance.  The scandal became notorious.
A learned body intimated that his name had been struck from the list of
its vice-presidents.  Two friends implored him to consider his
professional credit.  He cursed them all three, and spent forty guineas
on a bangle to take with him to the lady.  He was at her house every
evening, and she drove in his carriage in the afternoons.  There was
not an attempt on either side to conceal their relations; but there
came at last a little incident to interrupt them.

It was a dismal winter's night, very cold and gusty, with the wind
whooping in the chimneys and blustering against the window-panes. A
thin spatter of rain tinkled on the glass with each fresh sough of the
gale, drowning for the instant the dull gurgle and drip from the eaves.
Douglas Stone had finished his dinner, and sat by his fire in the
study, a glass of rich port upon the malachite table at his elbow.  As
he raised it to his lips, he held it up against the lamplight, and
watched with the eye of a connoisseur the tiny scales of beeswing which
floated in its rich ruby depths.  The fire, as it spurted up, threw
fitful lights upon his bald, clear-cut face, with its widely-opened
grey eyes, its thick and yet firm lips, and the deep, square jaw, which
had something Roman in its strength and its animalism.  He smiled from
time to time as he nestled back in his luxurious chair.  Indeed, he had
a right to feel well pleased, for, against the advice of six
colleagues, he had performed an operation that day of which only two
cases were on record, and the result had been brilliant beyond all
expectation.  No other man in London would have had the daring to plan,
or the skill to execute, such a heroic measure.

But he had promised Lady Sannox to see her that evening and it was
already half-past eight.  His hand was outstretched to the bell to
order the carriage when he heard the dull thud of the knocker. An
instant later there was the shuffling of feet in the hall, and the
sharp closing of a door.

"A patient to see you, sir, in the consulting room," said the butler.

"About himself?"

"No, sir; I think he wants you to go out."

"It is too late," cried Douglas Stone peevishly.  "I won't go."

"This is his card, sir."

The butler presented it upon the gold salver which had been given to
his master by the wife of a Prime Minister.

"'Hamil Ali, Smyrna.'  Hum!  The fellow is a Turk, I suppose."

"Yes, sir.  He seems as if he came from abroad, sir.  And he's in a
terrible way."

"Tut, tut!  I have an engagement.  I must go somewhere else. But I'll
see him.  Show him in here, Pim."

A few moments later the butler swung open the door and ushered in a
small and decrepit man, who walked with a bent back and with the
forward push of the face and blink of the eyes which goes with extreme
short sight.  His face was swarthy, and his hair and beard of the
deepest black.  In one hand he held a turban of white muslin striped
with red, in the other a small chamois-leather bag.

"Good evening," said Douglas Stone, when the butler had closed the
door.  "You speak English, I presume?"

"Yes, sir.  I am from Asia Minor, but I speak English when I speak
slow."

"You wanted me to go out, I understand?"

"Yes, sir.  I wanted very much that you should see my wife."

"I could come in the morning, but I have an engagement which prevents
me from seeing your wife tonight."

The Turk's answer was a singular one.  He pulled the string which
closed the mouth of the chamois-leather bag, and poured a flood of gold
on to the table.

"There are one hundred pounds there," said he, "and I promise you that
it will not take you an hour.  I have a cab ready at the door."

Douglas Stone glanced at his watch.  An hour would not make it too late
to visit Lady Sannox.  He had been there later.  And the fee was an
extraordinarily high one.  He had been pressed by his creditors lately,
and he could not afford to let such a chance pass.  He would go.

"What is the case?" he asked.

"Oh, it is so sad a one!  So sad a one!  You have not, perhaps heard of
the daggers of the Almohades?"

"Never."

"Ah, they are Eastern daggers of a great age and of a singular shape,
with the hilt like what you call a stirrup.  I am a curiosity dealer,
you understand, and that is why I have come to England from Smyrna, but
next week I go back once more.  Many things I brought with me, and I
have a few things left, but among them, to my sorrow, is one of these
daggers."

"You will remember that I have an appointment, sir," said the surgeon,
with some irritation; "pray confine yourself to the necessary details."

"You will see that it is necessary.  Today my wife fell down in a faint
in the room in which I keep my wares, and she cut her lower lip upon
this cursed dagger of Almohades."

"I see," said Douglas Stone, rising.  "And you wish me to dress the
wound?"

"No, no, it is worse than that."

"What then?"

"These daggers are poisoned."

"Poisoned!"

"Yes, and there is no man, East or West, who can tell now what is the
poison or what the cure.  But all that is known I know, for my father
was in this trade before me, and we have had much to do with these
poisoned weapons."

"What are the symptoms?"

"Deep sleep, and death in thirty hours."

"And you say there is no cure.  Why then should you pay me this
considerable fee?"

"No drug can cure, but the knife may."

"And how?"

"The poison is slow of absorption.  It remains for hours in the wound."

"Washing, then, might cleanse it?"

"No more than in a snake bite.  It is too subtle and too deadly."

"Excision of the wound, then?"

"That is it.  If it be on the finger, take the finger off.  So said my
father always.  But think of where this wound is, and that it is my
wife.  It is dreadful!"

But familiarity with such grim matters may take the finer edge from a
man's sympathy.  To Douglas Stone this was already an interesting case,
and he brushed aside as irrelevant the feeble objections of the husband.

"It appears to be that or nothing," said he brusquely.  "It is better
to lose a lip than a life."

"Ah, yes, I know that you are right.  Well, well, it is kismet, and it
must be faced.  I have the cab, and you will come with me and do this
thing."

Douglas Stone took his case of bistouries from a drawer, and placed it
with a roll of bandage and a compress of lint in his pocket.  He must
waste no more time if he were to see Lady Sannox.

"I am ready," said he, pulling on his overcoat.  "Will you take a glass
of wine before you go out into this cold air?"

His visitor shrank away, with a protesting hand upraised.

"You forget that I am a Mussulman, and a true follower of the Prophet,"
said he.  "But tell me what is the bottle of green glass which you have
placed in your pocket?"

"It is chloroform."

"Ah, that also is forbidden to us.  It is a spirit, and we make no use
of such things."

"What!  You would allow your wife to go through an operation without an
anaesthetic?"

"Ah!  she will feel nothing, poor soul.  The deep sleep has already
come on, which is the first working of the poison.  And then I have
given her of our Smyrna opium.  Come, sir, for already an hour has
passed."

As they stepped out into the darkness, a sheet of rain was driven in
upon their faces, and the hall lamp, which dangled from the arm of a
marble Caryatid, went out with a fluff.  Pim, the butler, pushed the
heavy door to, straining hard with his shoulder against the wind, while
the two men groped their way towards the yellow glare which showed
where the cab was waiting.  An instant later they were rattling upon
their journey.

"Is it far?" asked Douglas Stone.

"Oh, no.  We have a very little quiet place off the Euston Road."

The surgeon pressed the spring of his repeater and listened to the
little tings which told him the hour.  It was a quarter past nine.  He
calculated the distances, and the short time which it would take him to
perform so trivial an operation.  He ought to reach Lady Sannox by ten
o'clock.  Through the fogged windows he saw the blurred gas lamps
dancing past, with occasionally the broader glare of a shop front.  The
rain was pelting and rattling upon the leathern top of the carriage,
and the wheels swashed as they rolled through puddle and mud.  Opposite
to him the white headgear of his companion gleamed faintly through the
obscurity. The surgeon felt in his pockets and arranged his needles,
his ligatures and his safety-pins, that no time might be wasted when
they arrived.  He chafed with impatience and drummed his foot upon the
floor.

But the cab slowed down at last and pulled up.  In an instant Douglas
Stone was out, and the Smyrna merchant's toe was at his very heel.

"You can wait," said he to the driver.

It was a mean-looking house in a narrow and sordid street.  The
surgeon, who knew his London well, cast a swift glance into the
shadows, but there was nothing distinctive--no shop, no movement,
nothing but a double line of dull, flat-faced houses, a double stretch
of wet flagstones which gleamed in the lamplight, and a double rush of
water in the gutters which swirled and gurgled towards the sewer
gratings.  The door which faced them was blotched and discoloured, and
a faint light in the fan pane above, it served to show the dust and the
grime which covered it.  Above in one of the bedroom windows, there was
a dull yellow glimmer.  The merchant knocked loudly, and, as he turned
his dark face towards the light, Douglas Stone could see that it was
contracted with anxiety.  A bolt was drawn, and an elderly woman with a
taper stood in the doorway, shielding the thin flame with her gnarled
hand.

"Is all well?" gasped the merchant.

"She is as you left her, sir."

"She has not spoken?"

"No, she is in a deep sleep."

The merchant closed the door, and Douglas Stone walked down the narrow
passage, glancing about him in some surprise as he did so. There was no
oil-cloth, no mat, no hat-rack.  Deep grey dust and heavy festoons of
cobwebs met his eyes everywhere.  Following the old woman up the
winding stair, his firm footfall echoed harshly through the silent
house.  There was no carpet.

The bedroom was on the second landing.  Douglas Stone followed the old
nurse into it, with the merchant at his heels.  Here, at least, there
was furniture and to spare.  The floor was littered and the corners
piled with Turkish cabinets, inlaid tables, coats of chain mail,
strange pipes, and grotesque weapons.  A single small lamp stood upon a
bracket on the wall.  Douglas Stone took it down, and picking his way
among the lumber, walked over to a couch in the corner, on which lay a
woman dressed in the Turkish fashion, with yashmak and veil.  The lower
part of the face was exposed, and the surgeon saw a jagged cut which
zigzagged along the border of the under lip.

"You will forgive the yashmak," said the Turk.  "You know our views
about women in the East."

But the surgeon was not thinking about the yashmak.  This was no longer
a woman to him.  It was a case.  He stooped and examined the wound
carefully.

"There are no signs of irritation," said he.  "We might delay the
operation until local symptoms develop."

The husband wrung his hands in uncontrollable agitation.

"Oh!  sir, sir," he cried.  "Do not trifle.  You do not know. It is
deadly.  I know, and I give you my assurance that an operation is
absolutely necessary.  Only the knife can save her."

"And yet I am inclined to wait," said Douglas Stone.

"That is enough," the Turk cried, angrily.  "Every minute is of
importance, and I cannot stand here and see my wife allowed to sink.
It only remains for me to give you my thanks for having come, and to
call in some other surgeon before it is too late."

Douglas Stone hesitated.  To refund that hundred pounds was no pleasant
matter.  But of course if he left the case he must return the money.
And if the Turk were right and the woman died, his position before a
coroner might be an embarrassing one.

"You have had personal experience of this poison?" he asked.

"I have."

"And you assure me that an operation is needful."

"I swear it by all that I hold sacred."

"The disfigurement will be frightful."

"I can understand that the mouth will not be a pretty one to kiss."

Douglas Stone turned fiercely upon the man.  The speech was a brutal
one.  But the Turk has his own fashion of talk and of thought, and
there was no time for wrangling.  Douglas Stone drew a bistoury from
his case, opened it and felt the keen straight edge with his
forefinger.  Then he held the lamp closer to the bed.  Two dark eyes
were gazing up at him through the slit in the yashmak. They were all
iris, and the pupil was hardly to be seen.

"You have given her a very heavy dose of opium."

"Yes, she has had a good dose."

He glanced again at the dark eyes which looked straight at his own.
They were dull and lustreless, but, even as he gazed, a little shifting
sparkle came into them, and the lips quivered.

"She is not absolutely unconscious," said he.

"Would it not be well to use the knife while it will be painless?"

The same thought had crossed the surgeon's mind.  He grasped the
wounded lip with his forceps, and with two swift cuts he took out a
broad V-shaped piece.  The woman sprang up on the couch with a dreadful
gurgling scream.  Her covering was torn from her face. It was a face
that he knew.  In spite of that protruding upper lip and that slobber
of blood, it was a face that he knew, She kept on putting her hand up
to the gap and screaming.  Douglas Stone sat down at the foot of the
couch with his knife and his forceps.  The room was whirling round, and
he had felt something go like a ripping seam behind his ear.  A
bystander would have said that his face was the more ghastly of the
two.  As in a dream, or as if he had been looking at something at the
play, he was conscious that the Turk's hair and beard lay upon the
table, and that Lord Sannox was leaning against the wall with his hand
to his side, laughing silently.  The screams had died away now, and the
dreadful head had dropped back again upon the pillow, but Douglas Stone
still sat motionless, and Lord Sannox still chuckled quietly to himself.

"It was really very necessary for Marion, this operation," said he,
"not physically, but morally, you know, morally."

Douglas Stone stooped for yards and began to play with the fringe of
the coverlet.  His knife tinkled down upon the ground, but he still
held the forceps and something more.

"I had long intended to make a little example," said Lord Sannox,
suavely.  "Your note of Wednesday miscarried, and I have it here in my
pocket-book.  I took some pains in carrying out my idea. The wound, by
the way, was from nothing more dangerous than my signet ring."

He glanced keenly at his silent companion, and cocked the small
revolver which he held in his coat pocket.  But Douglas Stone was still
picking at the coverlet.

"You see you have kept your appointment after all," said Lord Sannox.

And at that Douglas Stone began to laugh.  He laughed long and loudly.
But Lord Sannox did not laugh now.  Something like fear sharpened and
hardened his features.  He walked from the room, and he walked on
tiptoe.  The old woman was waiting outside.

"Attend to your mistress when she awakes," said Lord Sannox.

Then he went down to the street.  The cab was at the door, and the
driver raised his hand to his hat.

"John," said Lord Sannox, "you will take the doctor home first. He will
want leading downstairs, I think.  Tell his butler that he has been
taken ill at a case."

"Very good, sir."

"Then you can take Lady Sannox home."

"And how about yourself, sir?"

"Oh, my address for the next few months will be Hotel di Roma, Venice.
Just see that the letters are sent on.  And tell Stevens to exhibit all
the purple chrysanthemums next Monday, and to wire me the result."



The Terror of Blue John Gap

The following narrative was found among the papers of Dr. James
Hardcastle, who died of phthisis on February 4th, 1908, at 36, Upper
Coventry Flats, South Kensington.  Those who knew him best, while
refusing to express an opinion upon this particular statement, are
unanimous in asserting that he was a man of a sober and scientific turn
of mind, absolutely devoid of imagination, and most unlikely to invent
any abnormal series of events.  The paper was contained in an envelope,
which was docketed, "A Short Account of the Circumstances which
occurred near Miss Allerton's Farm in North-West Derbyshire in the
Spring of Last Year."  The envelope was sealed, and on the other side
was written in pencil--


DEAR SEATON,--

"It may interest, and perhaps pain you, to know that the incredulity
with which you met my story has prevented me from ever opening my mouth
upon the subject again.  I leave this record after my death, and
perhaps strangers may be found to have more confidence in me than my
friend."


Inquiry has failed to elicit who this Seaton may have been.  I may add
that the visit of the deceased to Allerton's Farm, and the general
nature of the alarm there, apart from his particular explanation, have
been absolutely established.  With this foreword I append his account
exactly as he left it.  It is in the form of a diary, some entries in
which have been expanded, while a few have been erased.


April 17.--Already I feel the benefit of this wonderful upland air.
The farm of the Allertons lies fourteen hundred and twenty feet above
sea-level, so it may well be a bracing climate. Beyond the usual
morning cough I have very little discomfort, and, what with the fresh
milk and the home-grown mutton, I have every chance of putting on
weight.  I think Saunderson will be pleased.

The two Miss Allertons are charmingly quaint and kind, two dear little
hard-working old maids, who are ready to lavish all the heart which
might have gone out to husband and to children upon an invalid
stranger.  Truly, the old maid is a most useful person, one of the
reserve forces of the community.  They talk of the superfluous woman,
but what would the poor superfluous man do without her kindly presence?
By the way, in their simplicity they very quickly let out the reason
why Saunderson recommended their farm.  The Professor rose from the
ranks himself, and I believe that in his youth he was not above scaring
crows in these very fields.

It is a most lonely spot, and the walks are picturesque in the extreme.
The farm consists of grazing land lying at the bottom of an irregular
valley.  On each side are the fantastic limestone hills, formed of rock
so soft that you can break it away with your hands.  All this country
is hollow.  Could you strike it with some gigantic hammer it would boom
like a drum, or possibly cave in altogether and expose some huge
subterranean sea.  A great sea there must surely be, for on all sides
the streams run into the mountain itself, never to reappear.  There are
gaps everywhere amid the rocks, and when you pass through them you find
yourself in great caverns, which wind down into the bowels of the
earth.  I have a small bicycle lamp, and it is a perpetual joy to me to
carry it into these weird solitudes, and to see the wonderful silver
and black effect when I throw its light upon the stalactites which
drape the lofty roofs.  Shut off the lamp, and you are in the blackest
darkness.  Turn it on, and it is a scene from the Arabian Nights.

But there is one of these strange openings in the earth which has a
special interest, for it is the handiwork, not of nature, but of man.
I had never heard of Blue John when I came to these parts. It is the
name given to a peculiar mineral of a beautiful purple shade, which is
only found at one or two places in the world.  It is so rare that an
ordinary vase of Blue John would be valued at a great price.  The
Romans, with that extraordinary instinct of theirs, discovered that it
was to be found in this valley, and sank a horizontal shaft deep into
the mountain side.  The opening of their mine has been called Blue John
Gap, a clean-cut arch in the rock, the mouth all overgrown with bushes.
It is a goodly passage which the Roman miners have cut, and it
intersects some of the great water-worn caves, so that if you enter
Blue John Gap you would do well to mark your steps and to have a good
store of candles, or you may never make your way back to the daylight
again. I have not yet gone deeply into it, but this very day I stood at
the mouth of the arched tunnel, and peering down into the black
recesses beyond, I vowed that when my health returned I would devote
some holiday to exploring those mysterious depths and finding out for
myself how far the Roman had penetrated into the Derbyshire hills.

Strange how superstitious these countrymen are!  I should have thought
better of young Armitage, for he is a man of some education and
character, and a very fine fellow for his station in life.  I was
standing at the Blue John Gap when he came across the field to me.

"Well, doctor," said he, "you're not afraid, anyhow."

"Afraid!" I answered.  "Afraid of what?"

"Of it," said he, with a jerk of his thumb towards the black vault, "of
the Terror that lives in the Blue John Cave."

How absurdly easy it is for a legend to arise in a lonely countryside!
I examined him as to the reasons for his weird belief.  It seems that
from time to time sheep have been missing from the fields, carried
bodily away, according to Armitage.  That they could have wandered away
of their own accord and disappeared among the mountains was an
explanation to which he would not listen.  On one occasion a pool of
blood had been found, and some tufts of wool.  That also, I pointed
out, could be explained in a perfectly natural way.  Further, the
nights upon which sheep disappeared were invariably very dark, cloudy
nights with no moon. This I met with the obvious retort that those were
the nights which a commonplace sheep-stealer would naturally choose for
his work. On one occasion a gap had been made in a wall, and some of
the stones scattered for a considerable distance.  Human agency again,
in my opinion.  Finally, Armitage clinched all his arguments by telling
me that he had actually heard the Creature--indeed, that anyone could
hear it who remained long enough at the Gap.  It was a distant roaring
of an immense volume.  I could not but smile at this, knowing, as I do,
the strange reverberations which come out of an underground water
system running amid the chasms of a limestone formation.  My
incredulity annoyed Armitage so that he turned and left me with some
abruptness.

And now comes the queer point about the whole business.  I was still
standing near the mouth of the cave turning over in my mind the various
statements of Armitage, and reflecting how readily they could be
explained away, when suddenly, from the depth of the tunnel beside me,
there issued a most extraordinary sound.  How shall I describe it?
First of all, it seemed to be a great distance away, far down in the
bowels of the earth.  Secondly, in spite of this suggestion of
distance, it was very loud.  Lastly, it was not a boom, nor a crash,
such as one would associate with falling water or tumbling rock, but it
was a high whine, tremulous and vibrating, almost like the whinnying of
a horse.  It was certainly a most remarkable experience, and one which
for a moment, I must admit, gave a new significance to Armitage's
words.  I waited by the Blue John Gap for half an hour or more, but
there was no return of the sound, so at last I wandered back to the
farmhouse, rather mystified by what had occurred.  Decidedly I shall
explore that cavern when my strength is restored.  Of course,
Armitage's explanation is too absurd for discussion, and yet that sound
was certainly very strange.  It still rings in my ears as I write.

April 20.--In the last three days I have made several expeditions to
the Blue John Gap, and have even penetrated some short distance, but my
bicycle lantern is so small and weak that I dare not trust myself very
far.  I shall do the thing more systematically.  I have heard no sound
at all, and could almost believe that I had been the victim of some
hallucination suggested, perhaps, by Armitage's conversation.  Of
course, the whole idea is absurd, and yet I must confess that those
bushes at the entrance of the cave do present an appearance as if some
heavy creature had forced its way through them.  I begin to be keenly
interested.  I have said nothing to the Miss Allertons, for they are
quite superstitious enough already, but I have bought some candles, and
mean to investigate for myself.

I observed this morning that among the numerous tufts of sheep's wool
which lay among the bushes near the cavern there was one which was
smeared with blood.  Of course, my reason tells me that if sheep wander
into such rocky places they are likely to injure themselves, and yet
somehow that splash of crimson gave me a sudden shock, and for a moment
I found myself shrinking back in horror from the old Roman arch.  A
fetid breath seemed to ooze from the black depths into which I peered.
Could it indeed be possible that some nameless thing, some dreadful
presence, was lurking down yonder?  I should have been incapable of
such feelings in the days of my strength, but one grows more nervous
and fanciful when one's health is shaken.

For the moment I weakened in my resolution, and was ready to leave the
secret of the old mine, if one exists, for ever unsolved. But tonight
my interest has returned and my nerves grown more steady.  Tomorrow I
trust that I shall have gone more deeply into this matter.

April 22.--Let me try and set down as accurately as I can my
extraordinary experience of yesterday.  I started in the afternoon, and
made my way to the Blue John Gap.  I confess that my misgivings
returned as I gazed into its depths, and I wished that I had brought a
companion to share my exploration.  Finally, with a return of
resolution, I lit my candle, pushed my way through the briars, and
descended into the rocky shaft.

It went down at an acute angle for some fifty feet, the floor being
covered with broken stone.  Thence there extended a long, straight
passage cut in the solid rock.  I am no geologist, but the lining of
this corridor was certainly of some harder material than limestone, for
there were points where I could actually see the tool-marks which the
old miners had left in their excavation, as fresh as if they had been
done yesterday.  Down this strange, old-world corridor I stumbled, my
feeble flame throwing a dim circle of light around me, which made the
shadows beyond the more threatening and obscure.  Finally, I came to a
spot where the Roman tunnel opened into a water-worn cavern--a huge
hall, hung with long white icicles of lime deposit.  From this central
chamber I could dimly perceive that a number of passages worn by the
subterranean streams wound away into the depths of the earth.  I was
standing there wondering whether I had better return, or whether I dare
venture farther into this dangerous labyrinth, when my eyes fell upon
something at my feet which strongly arrested my attention.

The greater part of the floor of the cavern was covered with boulders
of rock or with hard incrustations of lime, but at this particular
point there had been a drip from the distant roof, which had left a
patch of soft mud.  In the very centre of this there was a huge
mark--an ill-defined blotch, deep, broad and irregular, as if a great
boulder had fallen upon it.  No loose stone lay near, however, nor was
there anything to account for the impression.  It was far too large to
be caused by any possible animal, and besides, there was only the one,
and the patch of mud was of such a size that no reasonable stride could
have covered it.  As I rose from the examination of that singular mark
and then looked round into the black shadows which hemmed me in, I must
confess that I felt for a moment a most unpleasant sinking of my heart,
and that, do what I could, the candle trembled in my outstretched hand.

I soon recovered my nerve, however, when I reflected how absurd it was
to associate so huge and shapeless a mark with the track of any known
animal.  Even an elephant could not have produced it.  I determined,
therefore, that I would not be scared by vague and senseless fears from
carrying out my exploration.  Before proceeding, I took good note of a
curious rock formation in the wall by which I could recognize the
entrance of the Roman tunnel. The precaution was very necessary, for
the great cave, so far as I could see it, was intersected by passages.
Having made sure of my position, and reassured myself by examining my
spare candles and my matches, I advanced slowly over the rocky and
uneven surface of the cavern.

And now I come to the point where I met with such sudden and desperate
disaster.  A stream, some twenty feet broad, ran across my path, and I
walked for some little distance along the bank to find a spot where I
could cross dry-shod.  Finally, I came to a place where a single flat
boulder lay near the centre, which I could reach in a stride.  As it
chanced, however, the rock had been cut away and made top-heavy by the
rush of the stream, so that it tilted over as I landed on it and shot
me into the ice-cold water.  My candle went out, and I found myself
floundering about in utter and absolute darkness.

I staggered to my feet again, more amused than alarmed by my adventure.
The candle had fallen from my hand, and was lost in the stream, but I
had two others in my pocket, so that it was of no importance.  I got
one of them ready, and drew out my box of matches to light it.  Only
then did I realize my position.  The box had been soaked in my fall
into the river.  It was impossible to strike the matches.

A cold hand seemed to close round my heart as I realized my position.
The darkness was opaque and horrible.  It was so utter one put one's
hand up to one's face as if to press off something solid.  I stood
still, and by an effort I steadied myself.  I tried to reconstruct in
my mind a map of the floor of the cavern as I had last seen it.  Alas!
the bearings which had impressed themselves upon my mind were high on
the wall, and not to be found by touch. Still, I remembered in a
general way how the sides were situated, and I hoped that by groping my
way along them I should at last come to the opening of the Roman
tunnel.  Moving very slowly, and continually striking against the
rocks, I set out on this desperate quest.

But I very soon realized how impossible it was.  In that black, velvety
darkness one lost all one's bearings in an instant.  Before I had made
a dozen paces, I was utterly bewildered as to my whereabouts.  The
rippling of the stream, which was the one sound audible, showed me
where it lay, but the moment that I left its bank I was utterly lost.
The idea of finding my way back in absolute darkness through that
limestone labyrinth was clearly an impossible one.

I sat down upon a boulder and reflected upon my unfortunate plight.  I
had not told anyone that I proposed to come to the Blue John mine, and
it was unlikely that a search party would come after me.  Therefore I
must trust to my own resources to get clear of the danger.  There was
only one hope, and that was that the matches might dry.  When I fell
into the river, only half of me had got thoroughly wet.  My left
shoulder had remained above the water.  I took the box of matches,
therefore, and put it into my left armpit. The moist air of the cavern
might possibly be counteracted by the heat of my body, but even so, I
knew that I could not hope to get a light for many hours.  Meanwhile
there was nothing for it but to wait.

By good luck I had slipped several biscuits into my pocket before I
left the farm-house.  These I now devoured, and washed them down with a
draught from that wretched stream which had been the cause of all my
misfortunes.  Then I felt about for a comfortable seat among the rocks,
and, having discovered a place where I could get a support for my back,
I stretched out my legs and settled myself down to wait.  I was
wretchedly damp and cold, but I tried to cheer myself with the
reflection that modern science prescribed open windows and walks in all
weather for my disease. Gradually, lulled by the monotonous gurgle of
the stream, and by the absolute darkness, I sank into an uneasy slumber.

How long this lasted I cannot say.  It may have been for an hour, it
may have been for several.  Suddenly I sat up on my rock couch, with
every nerve thrilling and every sense acutely on the alert.  Beyond all
doubt I had heard a sound--some sound very distinct from the gurgling
of the waters.  It had passed, but the reverberation of it still
lingered in my ear.  Was it a search party?  They would most certainly
have shouted, and vague as this sound was which had wakened me, it was
very distinct from the human voice.  I sat palpitating and hardly
daring to breathe.  There it was again!  And again!  Now it had become
continuous.  It was a tread--yes, surely it was the tread of some
living creature. But what a tread it was!  It gave one the impression
of enormous weight carried upon sponge-like feet, which gave forth a
muffled but ear-filling sound.  The darkness was as complete as ever,
but the tread was regular and decisive.  And it was coming beyond all
question in my direction.

My skin grew cold, and my hair stood on end as I listened to that
steady and ponderous footfall.  There was some creature there, and
surely by the speed of its advance, it was one which could see in the
dark.  I crouched low on my rock and tried to blend myself into it.
The steps grew nearer still, then stopped, and presently I was aware of
a loud lapping and gurgling.  The creature was drinking at the stream.
Then again there was silence, broken by a succession of long sniffs and
snorts of tremendous volume and energy.  Had it caught the scent of me?
My own nostrils were filled by a low fetid odour, mephitic and
abominable.  Then I heard the steps again.  They were on my side of the
stream now.  The stones rattled within a few yards of where I lay.
Hardly daring to breathe, I crouched upon my rock.  Then the steps drew
away.  I heard the splash as it returned across the river, and the
sound died away into the distance in the direction from which it had
come.

For a long time I lay upon the rock, too much horrified to move.  I
thought of the sound which I had heard coming from the depths of the
cave, of Armitage's fears, of the strange impression in the mud, and
now came this final and absolute proof that there was indeed some
inconceivable monster, something utterly unearthly and dreadful, which
lurked in the hollow of the mountain.  Of its nature or form I could
frame no conception, save that it was both light-footed and gigantic.
The combat between my reason, which told me that such things could not
be, and my senses, which told me that they were, raged within me as I
lay.  Finally, I was almost ready to persuade myself that this
experience had been part of some evil dream, and that my abnormal
condition might have conjured up an hallucination.  But there remained
one final experience which removed the last possibility of doubt from
my mind.

I had taken my matches from my armpit and felt them.  They seemed
perfectly hard and dry.  Stooping down into a crevice of the rocks, I
tried one of them.  To my delight it took fire at once. I lit the
candle, and, with a terrified backward glance into the obscure depths
of the cavern, I hurried in the direction of the Roman passage.  As I
did so I passed the patch of mud on which I had seen the huge imprint.
Now I stood astonished before it, for there were three similar imprints
upon its surface, enormous in size, irregular in outline, of a depth
which indicated the ponderous weight which had left them.  Then a great
terror surged over me.  Stooping and shading my candle with my hand, I
ran in a frenzy of fear to the rocky archway, hastened up it, and never
stopped until, with weary feet and panting lungs, I rushed up the final
slope of stones, broke through the tangle of briars, and flung myself
exhausted upon the soft grass under the peaceful light of the stars.
It was three in the morning when I reached the farm-house, and today I
am all unstrung and quivering after my terrific adventure.  As yet I
have told no one.  I must move warily in the matter.  What would the
poor lonely women, or the uneducated yokels here think of it if I were
to tell them my experience?  Let me go to someone who can understand
and advise.

April 25.--I was laid up in bed for two days after my incredible
adventure in the cavern.  I use the adjective with a very definite
meaning, for I have had an experience since which has shocked me almost
as much as the other.  I have said that I was looking round for someone
who could advise me.  There is a Dr. Mark Johnson who practices some
few miles away, to whom I had a note of recommendation from Professor
Saunderson.  To him I drove, when I was strong enough to get about, and
I recounted to him my whole strange experience.  He listened intently,
and then carefully examined me, paying special attention to my reflexes
and to the pupils of my eyes.  When he had finished, he refused to
discuss my adventure, saying that it was entirely beyond him, but he
gave me the card of a Mr. Picton at Castleton, with the advice that I
should instantly go to him and tell him the story exactly as I had done
to himself.  He was, according to my adviser, the very man who was
pre-eminently suited to help me.  I went on to the station, therefore,
and made my way to the little town, which is some ten miles away.  Mr.
Picton appeared to be a man of importance, as his brass plate was
displayed upon the door of a considerable building on the outskirts of
the town.  I was about to ring his bell, when some misgiving came into
my mind, and, crossing to a neighbouring shop, I asked the man behind
the counter if he could tell me anything of Mr. Picton.  "Why," said
he, "he is the best mad doctor in Derbyshire, and yonder is his
asylum."  You can imagine that it was not long before I had shaken the
dust of Castleton from my feet and returned to the farm, cursing all
unimaginative pedants who cannot conceive that there may be things in
creation which have never yet chanced to come across their mole's
vision.  After all, now that I am cooler, I can afford to admit that I
have been no more sympathetic to Armitage than Dr. Johnson has been to
me.

April 27.  When I was a student I had the reputation of being a man of
courage and enterprise.  I remember that when there was a ghost-hunt at
Coltbridge it was I who sat up in the haunted house.  Is it advancing
years (after all, I am only thirty-five), or is it this physical malady
which has caused degeneration? Certainly my heart quails when I think
of that horrible cavern in the hill, and the certainty that it has some
monstrous occupant. What shall I do?  There is not an hour in the day
that I do not debate the question.  If I say nothing, then the mystery
remains unsolved.  If I do say anything, then I have the alternative of
mad alarm over the whole countryside, or of absolute incredulity which
may end in consigning me to an asylum.  On the whole, I think that my
best course is to wait, and to prepare for some expedition which shall
be more deliberate and better thought out than the last.  As a first
step I have been to Castleton and obtained a few essentials--a large
acetylene lantern for one thing, and a good double-barrelled sporting
rifle for another.  The latter I have hired, but I have bought a dozen
heavy game cartridges, which would bring down a rhinoceros.  Now I am
ready for my troglodyte friend. Give me better health and a little
spate of energy, and I shall try conclusions with him yet.  But who and
what is he?  Ah!  there is the question which stands between me and my
sleep.  How many theories do I form, only to discard each in turn!  It
is all so utterly unthinkable.  And yet the cry, the footmark, the
tread in the cavern--no reasoning can get past these I think of the
old-world legends of dragons and of other monsters.  Were they,
perhaps, not such fairy-tales as we have thought?  Can it be that there
is some fact which underlies them, and am I, of all mortals, the one
who is chosen to expose it?

May 3.--For several days I have been laid up by the vagaries of an
English spring, and during those days there have been developments, the
true and sinister meaning of which no one can appreciate save myself.
I may say that we have had cloudy and moonless nights of late, which
according to my information were the seasons upon which sheep
disappeared.  Well, sheep have disappeared.  Two of Miss Allerton's,
one of old Pearson's of the Cat Walk, and one of Mrs. Moulton's.  Four
in all during three nights.  No trace is left of them at all, and the
countryside is buzzing with rumours of gipsies and of sheep-stealers.

But there is something more serious than that.  Young Armitage has
disappeared also.  He left his moorland cottage early on Wednesday
night and has never been heard of since.  He was an unattached man, so
there is less sensation than would otherwise be the case.  The popular
explanation is that he owes money, and has found a situation in some
other part of the country, whence he will presently write for his
belongings.  But I have grave misgivings. Is it not much more likely
that the recent tragedy of the sheep has caused him to take some steps
which may have ended in his own destruction?  He may, for example, have
lain in wait for the creature and been carried off by it into the
recesses of the mountains.  What an inconceivable fate for a civilized
Englishman of the twentieth century!  And yet I feel that it is
possible and even probable.  But in that case, how far am I answerable
both for his death and for any other mishap which may occur?  Surely
with the knowledge I already possess it must be my duty to see that
something is done, or if necessary to do it myself.  It must be the
latter, for this morning I went down to the local police-station and
told my story.  The inspector entered it all in a large book and bowed
me out with commendable gravity, but I heard a burst of laughter before
I had got down his garden path.  No doubt he was recounting my
adventure to his family.

June 10.--I am writing this, propped up in bed, six weeks after my last
entry in this journal.  I have gone through a terrible shock both to
mind and body, arising from such an experience as has seldom befallen a
human being before.  But I have attained my end.  The danger from the
Terror which dwells in the Blue John Gap has passed never to return.
Thus much at least I, a broken invalid, have done for the common good.
Let me now recount what occurred as clearly as I may.

The night of Friday, May 3rd, was dark and cloudy--the very night for
the monster to walk.  About eleven o'clock I went from the farm-house
with my lantern and my rifle, having first left a note upon the table
of my bedroom in which I said that, if I were missing, search should be
made for me in the direction of the Gap. I made my way to the mouth of
the Roman shaft, and, having perched myself among the rocks close to
the opening, I shut off my lantern and waited patiently with my loaded
rifle ready to my hand.

It was a melancholy vigil.  All down the winding valley I could see the
scattered lights of the farm-houses, and the church clock of
Chapel-le-Dale tolling the hours came faintly to my ears. These tokens
of my fellow-men served only to make my own position seem the more
lonely, and to call for a greater effort to overcome the terror which
tempted me continually to get back to the farm, and abandon for ever
this dangerous quest.  And yet there lies deep in every man a rooted
self-respect which makes it hard for him to turn back from that which
he has once undertaken.  This feeling of personal pride was my
salvation now, and it was that alone which held me fast when every
instinct of my nature was dragging me away. I am glad now that I had
the strength.  In spite of all that is has cost me, my manhood is at
least above reproach.

Twelve o'clock struck in the distant church, then one, then two.  It
was the darkest hour of the night.  The clouds were drifting low, and
there was not a star in the sky.  An owl was hooting somewhere among
the rocks, but no other sound, save the gentle sough of the wind, came
to my ears.  And then suddenly I heard it!  From far away down the
tunnel came those muffled steps, so soft and yet so ponderous.  I heard
also the rattle of stones as they gave way under that giant tread.
They drew nearer.  They were close upon me.  I heard the crashing of
the bushes round the entrance, and then dimly through the darkness I
was conscious of the loom of some enormous shape, some monstrous
inchoate creature, passing swiftly and very silently out from the
tunnel.  I was paralysed with fear and amazement.  Long as I had
waited, now that it had actually come I was unprepared for the shock.
I lay motionless and breathless, whilst the great dark mass whisked by
me and was swallowed up in the night.

But now I nerved myself for its return.  No sound came from the
sleeping countryside to tell of the horror which was loose.  In no way
could I judge how far off it was, what it was doing, or when it might
be back.  But not a second time should my nerve fail me, not a second
time should it pass unchallenged.  I swore it between my clenched teeth
as I laid my cocked rifle across the rock.

And yet it nearly happened.  There was no warning of approach now as
the creature passed over the grass.  Suddenly, like a dark, drifting
shadow, the huge bulk loomed up once more before me, making for the
entrance of the cave.  Again came that paralysis of volition which held
my crooked forefinger impotent upon the trigger.  But with a desperate
effort I shook it off.  Even as the brushwood rustled, and the
monstrous beast blended with the shadow of the Gap, I fired at the
retreating form.  In the blaze of the gun I caught a glimpse of a great
shaggy mass, something with rough and bristling hair of a withered grey
colour, fading away to white in its lower parts, the huge body
supported upon short, thick, curving legs.  I had just that glance, and
then I heard the rattle of the stones as the creature tore down into
its burrow.  In an instant, with a triumphant revulsion of feeling, I
had cast my fears to the wind, and uncovering my powerful lantern, with
my rifle in my hand, I sprang down from my rock and rushed after the
monster down the old Roman shaft.

My splendid lamp cast a brilliant flood of vivid light in front of me,
very different from the yellow glimmer which had aided me down the same
passage only twelve days before.  As I ran, I saw the great beast
lurching along before me, its huge bulk filling up the whole space from
wall to wall.  Its hair looked like coarse faded oakum, and hung down
in long, dense masses which swayed as it moved.  It was like an
enormous unclipped sheep in its fleece, but in size it was far larger
than the largest elephant, and its breadth seemed to be nearly as great
as its height.  It fills me with amazement now to think that I should
have dared to follow such a horror into the bowels of the earth, but
when one's blood is up, and when one's quarry seems to be flying, the
old primeval hunting-spirit awakes and prudence is cast to the wind.
Rifle in hand, I ran at the top of my speed upon the trail of the
monster.

I had seen that the creature was swift.  Now I was to find out to my
cost that it was also very cunning.  I had imagined that it was in
panic flight, and that I had only to pursue it.  The idea that it might
turn upon me never entered my excited brain.  I have already explained
that the passage down which I was racing opened into a great central
cave.  Into this I rushed, fearful lest I should lose all trace of the
beast.  But he had turned upon his own traces, and in a moment we were
face to face.

That picture, seen in the brilliant white light of the lantern, is
etched for ever upon my brain.  He had reared up on his hind legs as a
bear would do, and stood above me, enormous, menacing--such a creature
as no nightmare had ever brought to my imagination. I have said that he
reared like a bear, and there was something bear-like--if one could
conceive a bear which was ten-fold the bulk of any bear seen upon
earth--in his whole pose and attitude, in his great crooked forelegs
with their ivory-white claws, in his rugged skin, and in his red,
gaping mouth, fringed with monstrous fangs. Only in one point did he
differ from the bear, or from any other creature which walks the earth,
and even at that supreme moment a shudder of horror passed over me as I
observed that the eyes which glistened in the glow of my lantern were
huge, projecting bulbs, white and sightless.  For a moment his great
paws swung over my head.  The next he fell forward upon me, I and my
broken lantern crashed to the earth, and I remember no more.


When I came to myself I was back in the farm-house of the Allertons.
Two days had passed since my terrible adventure in the Blue John Gap.
It seems that I had lain all night in the cave insensible from
concussion of the brain, with my left arm and two ribs badly fractured.
In the morning my note had been found, a search party of a dozen
farmers assembled, and I had been tracked down and carried back to my
bedroom, where I had lain in high delirium ever since.  There was, it
seems, no sign of the creature, and no bloodstain which would show that
my bullet had found him as he passed.  Save for my own plight and the
marks upon the mud, there was nothing to prove that what I said was
true.

Six weeks have now elapsed, and I am able to sit out once more in the
sunshine.  Just opposite me is the steep hillside, grey with shaly
rock, and yonder on its flank is the dark cleft which marks the opening
of the Blue John Gap.  But it is no longer a source of terror.  Never
again through that ill-omened tunnel shall any strange shape flit out
into the world of men.  The educated and the scientific, the Dr.
Johnsons and the like, may smile at my narrative, but the poorer folk
of the countryside had never a doubt as to its truth.  On the day after
my recovering consciousness they assembled in their hundreds round the
Blue John Gap.  As the Castleton Courier said:


"It was useless for our correspondent, or for any of the adventurous
gentlemen who had come from Matlock, Buxton, and other parts, to offer
to descend, to explore the cave to the end, and to finally test the
extraordinary narrative of Dr. James Hardcastle. The country people had
taken the matter into their own hands, and from an early hour of the
morning they had worked hard in stopping up the entrance of the tunnel.
There is a sharp slope where the shaft begins, and great boulders,
rolled along by many willing hands, were thrust down it until the Gap
was absolutely sealed.  So ends the episode which has caused such
excitement throughout the country.  Local opinion is fiercely divided
upon the subject.  On the one hand are those who point to Dr.
Hardcastle's impaired health, and to the possibility of cerebral
lesions of tubercular origin giving rise to strange hallucinations.
Some idee fixe, according to these gentlemen, caused the doctor to
wander down the tunnel, and a fall among the rocks was sufficient to
account for his injuries.  On the other hand, a legend of a strange
creature in the Gap has existed for some months back, and the farmers
look upon Dr. Hardcastle's narrative and his personal injuries as a
final corroboration.  So the matter stands, and so the matter will
continue to stand, for no definite solution seems to us to be now
possible.  It transcends human wit to give any scientific explanation
which could cover the alleged facts."


Perhaps before the Courier published these words they would have been
wise to send their representative to me.  I have thought the matter
out, as no one else has occasion to do, and it is possible that I might
have removed some of the more obvious difficulties of the narrative and
brought it one degree nearer to scientific acceptance.  Let me then
write down the only explanation which seems to me to elucidate what I
know to my cost to have been a series of facts.  My theory may seem to
be wildly improbable, but at least no one can venture to say that it is
impossible.

My view is--and it was formed, as is shown by my diary, before my
personal adventure--that in this part of England there is a vast
subterranean lake or sea, which is fed by the great number of streams
which pass down through the limestone.  Where there is a large
collection of water there must also be some evaporation, mists or rain,
and a possibility of vegetation.  This in turn suggests that there may
be animal life, arising, as the vegetable life would also do, from
those seeds and types which had been introduced at an early period of
the world's history, when communication with the outer air was more
easy.  This place had then developed a fauna and flora of its own,
including such monsters as the one which I had seen, which may well
have been the old cave-bear, enormously enlarged and modified by its
new environment.  For countless aeons the internal and the external
creation had kept apart, growing steadily away from each other. Then
there had come some rift in the depths of the mountain which had
enabled one creature to wander up and, by means of the Roman tunnel, to
reach the open air.  Like all subterranean life, it had lost the power
of sight, but this had no doubt been compensated for by nature in other
directions.  Certainly it had some means of finding its way about, and
of hunting down the sheep upon the hillside.  As to its choice of dark
nights, it is part of my theory that light was painful to those great
white eyeballs, and that it was only a pitch-black world which it could
tolerate.  Perhaps, indeed, it was the glare of my lantern which saved
my life at that awful moment when we were face to face.  So I read the
riddle.  I leave these facts behind me, and if you can explain them, do
so; or if you choose to doubt them, do so.  Neither your belief nor
your incredulity can alter them, nor affect one whose task is nearly
over.


So ended the strange narrative of Dr. James Hardcastle.



The Brazilian Cat

It is hard luck on a young fellow to have expensive tastes, great
expectations, aristocratic connections, but no actual money in his
pocket, and no profession by which he may earn any.  The fact was that
my father, a good, sanguine, easy-going man, had such confidence in the
wealth and benevolence of his bachelor elder brother, Lord Southerton,
that he took it for granted that I, his only son, would never be called
upon to earn a living for myself. He imagined that if there were not a
vacancy for me on the great Southerton Estates, at least there would be
found some post in that diplomatic service which still remains the
special preserve of our privileged classes.  He died too early to
realize how false his calculations had been.  Neither my uncle nor the
State took the slightest notice of me, or showed any interest in my
career.  An occasional brace of pheasants, or basket of hares, was all
that ever reached me to remind me that I was heir to Otwell House and
one of the richest estates in the country.  In the meantime, I found
myself a bachelor and man about town, living in a suite of apartments
in Grosvenor Mansions, with no occupation save that of pigeon-shooting
and polo-playing at Hurlingham.  Month by month I realized that it was
more and more difficult to get the brokers to renew my bills, or to
cash any further post-obits upon an unentailed property.  Ruin lay
right across my path, and every day I saw it clearer, nearer, and more
absolutely unavoidable.

What made me feel my own poverty the more was that, apart from the
great wealth of Lord Southerton, all my other relations were fairly
well-to-do.  The nearest of these was Everard King, my father's nephew
and my own first cousin, who had spent an adventurous life in Brazil,
and had now returned to this country to settle down on his fortune.  We
never knew how he made his money, but he appeared to have plenty of it,
for he bought the estate of Greylands, near Clipton-on-the-Marsh, in
Suffolk.  For the first year of his residence in England he took no
more notice of me than my miserly uncle; but at last one summer
morning, to my very great relief and joy, I received a letter asking me
to come down that very day and spend a short visit at Greylands Court.
I was expecting a rather long visit to Bankruptcy Court at the time,
and this interruption seemed almost providential.  If I could only get
on terms with this unknown relative of mine, I might pull through yet.
For the family credit he could not let me go entirely to the wall.  I
ordered my valet to pack my valise, and I set off the same evening for
Clipton-on-the-Marsh.

After changing at Ipswich, a little local train deposited me at a
small, deserted station lying amidst a rolling grassy country, with a
sluggish and winding river curving in and out amidst the valleys,
between high, silted banks, which showed that we were within reach of
the tide.  No carriage was awaiting me (I found afterwards that my
telegram had been delayed), so I hired a dogcart at the local inn.  The
driver, an excellent fellow, was full of my relative's praises, and I
learned from him that Mr. Everard King was already a name to conjure
with in that part of the county.  He had entertained the
school-children, he had thrown his grounds open to visitors, he had
subscribed to charities--in short, his benevolence had been so
universal that my driver could only account for it on the supposition
that he had parliamentary ambitions.

My attention was drawn away from my driver's panegyric by the
appearance of a very beautiful bird which settled on a telegraph-post
beside the road.  At first I thought that it was a jay, but it was
larger, with a brighter plumage.  The driver accounted for its presence
at once by saying that it belonged to the very man whom we were about
to visit.  It seems that the acclimatization of foreign creatures was
one of his hobbies, and that he had brought with him from Brazil a
number of birds and beasts which he was endeavouring to rear in
England.  When once we had passed the gates of Greylands Park we had
ample evidence of this taste of his.  Some small spotted deer, a
curious wild pig known, I believe, as a peccary, a gorgeously feathered
oriole, some sort of armadillo, and a singular lumbering in-toed beast
like a very fat badger, were among the creatures which I observed as we
drove along the winding avenue.

Mr. Everard King, my unknown cousin, was standing in person upon the
steps of his house, for he had seen us in the distance, and guessed
that it was I.  His appearance was very homely and benevolent, short
and stout, forty-five years old, perhaps, with a round, good-humoured
face, burned brown with the tropical sun, and shot with a thousand
wrinkles.  He wore white linen clothes, in true planter style, with a
cigar between his lips, and a large Panama hat upon the back of his
head.  It was such a figure as one associates with a verandahed
bungalow, and it looked curiously out of place in front of this broad,
stone English mansion, with its solid wings and its Palladio pillars
before the doorway.

"My dear!" he cried, glancing over his shoulder; "my dear, here is our
guest!  Welcome, welcome to Greylands!  I am delighted to make your
acquaintance, Cousin Marshall, and I take it as a great compliment that
you should honour this sleepy little country place with your presence."

Nothing could be more hearty than his manner, and he set me at my ease
in an instant.  But it needed all his cordiality to atone for the
frigidity and even rudeness of his wife, a tall, haggard woman, who
came forward at his summons.  She was, I believe, of Brazilian
extraction, though she spoke excellent English, and I excused her
manners on the score of her ignorance of our customs. She did not
attempt to conceal, however, either then or afterwards, that I was no
very welcome visitor at Greylands Court.  Her actual words were, as a
rule, courteous, but she was the possessor of a pair of particularly
expressive dark eyes, and I read in them very clearly from the first
that she heartily wished me back in London once more.

However, my debts were too pressing and my designs upon my wealthy
relative were too vital for me to allow them to be upset by the
ill-temper of his wife, so I disregarded her coldness and reciprocated
the extreme cordiality of his welcome.  No pains had been spared by him
to make me comfortable.  My room was a charming one.  He implored me to
tell him anything which could add to my happiness.  It was on the tip
of my tongue to inform him that a blank cheque would materially help
towards that end, but I felt that it might be premature in the present
state of our acquaintance.  The dinner was excellent, and as we sat
together afterwards over his Havanas and coffee, which later he told me
was specially prepared upon his own plantation, it seemed to me that
all my driver's eulogies were justified, and that I had never met a
more large-hearted and hospitable man.

But, in spite of his cheery good nature, he was a man with a strong
will and a fiery temper of his own.  Of this I had an example upon the
following morning.  The curious aversion which Mrs. Everard King had
conceived towards me was so strong, that her manner at breakfast was
almost offensive.  But her meaning became unmistakable when her husband
had quitted the room.

"The best train in the day is at twelve-fifteen," said she.

"But I was not thinking of going today," I answered, frankly--perhaps
even defiantly, for I was determined not to be driven out by this woman.

"Oh, if it rests with you--" said she, and stopped with a most insolent
expression in her eyes.

"I am sure," I answered, "that Mr. Everard King would tell me if I were
outstaying my welcome."

"What's this?  What's this?" said a voice, and there he was in the
room.  He had overheard my last words, and a glance at our faces had
told him the rest.  In an instant his chubby, cheery face set into an
expression of absolute ferocity.

"Might I trouble you to walk outside, Marshall?" said he.  (I may
mention that my own name is Marshall King.)

He closed the door behind me, and then, for an instant, I heard him
talking in a low voice of concentrated passion to his wife. This gross
breach of hospitality had evidently hit upon his tenderest point.  I am
no eavesdropper, so I walked out on to the lawn.  Presently I heard a
hurried step behind me, and there was the lady, her face pale with
excitement, and her eyes red with tears.

"My husband has asked me to apologize to you, Mr. Marshall King," said
she, standing with downcast eyes before me.

"Please do not say another word, Mrs. King."

Her dark eyes suddenly blazed out at me.

"You fool!" she hissed, with frantic vehemence, and turning on her heel
swept back to the house.

The insult was so outrageous, so insufferable, that I could only stand
staring after her in bewilderment.  I was still there when my host
joined me.  He was his cheery, chubby self once more.

"I hope that my wife has apologized for her foolish remarks," said he.

"Oh, yes--yes, certainly!"

He put his hand through my arm and walked with me up and down the lawn.

"You must not take it seriously," said he.  "It would grieve me
inexpressibly if you curtailed your visit by one hour.  The fact
is--there is no reason why there should be any concealment between
relatives--that my poor dear wife is incredibly jealous.  She hates
that anyone--male or female--should for an instant come between us. Her
ideal is a desert island and an eternal tete-a-tete.  That gives you
the clue to her actions, which are, I confess, upon this particular
point, not very far removed from mania.  Tell me that you will think no
more of it."

"No, no; certainly not."

"Then light this cigar and come round with me and see my little
menagerie."

The whole afternoon was occupied by this inspection, which included all
the birds, beasts, and even reptiles which he had imported.  Some were
free, some in cages, a few actually in the house.  He spoke with
enthusiasm of his successes and his failures, his births and his
deaths, and he would cry out in his delight, like a schoolboy, when, as
we walked, some gaudy bird would flutter up from the grass, or some
curious beast slink into the cover. Finally he led me down a corridor
which extended from one wing of the house.  At the end of this there
was a heavy door with a sliding shutter in it, and beside it there
projected from the wall an iron handle attached to a wheel and a drum.
A line of stout bars extended across the passage.

"I am about to show you the jewel of my collection," said he. "There is
only one other specimen in Europe, now that the Rotterdam cub is dead.
It is a Brazilian cat."

"But how does that differ from any other cat?"

"You will soon see that," said he, laughing.  "Will you kindly draw
that shutter and look through?"

I did so, and found that I was gazing into a large, empty room, with
stone flags, and small, barred windows upon the farther wall. In the
centre of this room, lying in the middle of a golden patch of sunlight,
there was stretched a huge creature, as large as a tiger, but as black
and sleek as ebony.  It was simply a very enormous and very well-kept
black cat, and it cuddled up and basked in that yellow pool of light
exactly as a cat would do.  It was so graceful, so sinewy, and so
gently and smoothly diabolical, that I could not take my eyes from the
opening.

"Isn't he splendid?" said my host, enthusiastically.

"Glorious!  I never saw such a noble creature."

"Some people call it a black puma, but really it is not a puma at all.
That fellow is nearly eleven feet from tail to tip.  Four years ago he
was a little ball of black fluff, with two yellow eyes staring out of
it.  He was sold me as a new-born cub up in the wild country at the
head-waters of the Rio Negro.  They speared his mother to death after
she had killed a dozen of them."

"They are ferocious, then?"

"The most absolutely treacherous and bloodthirsty creatures upon earth.
You talk about a Brazilian cat to an up-country Indian, and see him get
the jumps.  They prefer humans to game. This fellow has never tasted
living blood yet, but when he does he will be a terror.  At present he
won't stand anyone but me in his den.  Even Baldwin, the groom, dare
not go near him.  As to me, I am his mother and father in one."

As he spoke he suddenly, to my astonishment, opened the door and
slipped in, closing it instantly behind him.  At the sound of his voice
the huge, lithe creature rose, yawned and rubbed its round, black head
affectionately against his side, while he patted and fondled it.

"Now, Tommy, into your cage!" said he.

The monstrous cat walked over to one side of the room and coiled itself
up under a grating.  Everard King came out, and taking the iron handle
which I have mentioned, he began to turn it. As he did so the line of
bars in the corridor began to pass through a slot in the wall and
closed up the front of this grating, so as to make an effective cage.
When it was in position he opened the door once more and invited me
into the room, which was heavy with the pungent, musty smell peculiar
to the great carnivora.

"That's how we work it," said he.  "We give him the run of the room for
exercise, and then at night we put him in his cage.  You can let him
out by turning the handle from the passage, or you can, as you have
seen, coop him up in the same way.  No, no, you should not do that!"

I had put my hand between the bars to pat the glossy, heaving flank.
He pulled it back, with a serious face.

"I assure you that he is not safe.  Don't imagine that because I can
take liberties with him anyone else can.  He is very exclusive in his
friends--aren't you, Tommy?  Ah, he hears his lunch coming to him!
Don't you, boy?"

A step sounded in the stone-flagged passage, and the creature had
sprung to his feet, and was pacing up and down the narrow cage, his
yellow eyes gleaming, and his scarlet tongue rippling and quivering
over the white line of his jagged teeth.  A groom entered with a coarse
joint upon a tray, and thrust it through the bars to him.  He pounced
lightly upon it, carried it off to the corner, and there, holding it
between his paws, tore and wrenched at it, raising his bloody muzzle
every now and then to look at us.  It was a malignant and yet
fascinating sight.

"You can't wonder that I am fond of him, can you?" said my host, as we
left the room, "especially when you consider that I have had the
rearing of him.  It was no joke bringing him over from the centre of
South America; but here he is safe and sound--and, as I have said, far
the most perfect specimen in Europe.  The people at the Zoo are dying
to have him, but I really can't part with him. Now, I think that I have
inflicted my hobby upon you long enough, so we cannot do better than
follow Tommy's example, and go to our lunch."

My South American relative was so engrossed by his grounds and their
curious occupants, that I hardly gave him credit at first for having
any interests outside them.  That he had some, and pressing ones, was
soon borne in upon me by the number of telegrams which he received.
They arrived at all hours, and were always opened by him with the
utmost eagerness and anxiety upon his face.  Sometimes I imagined that
it must be the Turf, and sometimes the Stock Exchange, but certainly he
had some very urgent business going forwards which was not transacted
upon the Downs of Suffolk. During the six days of my visit he had never
fewer than three or four telegrams a day, and sometimes as many as
seven or eight.

I had occupied these six days so well, that by the end of them I had
succeeded in getting upon the most cordial terms with my cousin.  Every
night we had sat up late in the billiard-room, he telling me the most
extraordinary stories of his adventures in America--stories so
desperate and reckless, that I could hardly associate them with the
brown little, chubby man before me.  In return, I ventured upon some of
my own reminiscences of London life, which interested him so much, that
he vowed he would come up to Grosvenor Mansions and stay with me.  He
was anxious to see the faster side of city life, and certainly, though
I say it, he could not have chosen a more competent guide.  It was not
until the last day of my visit that I ventured to approach that which
was on my mind.  I told him frankly about my pecuniary difficulties and
my impending ruin, and I asked his advice--though I hoped for something
more solid.  He listened attentively, puffing hard at his cigar.

"But surely," said he, "you are the heir of our relative, Lord
Southerton?"

"I have every reason to believe so, but he would never make me any
allowance."

"No, no, I have heard of his miserly ways.  My poor Marshall, your
position has been a very hard one.  By the way, have you heard any news
of Lord Southerton's health lately?"

"He has always been in a critical condition ever since my childhood."

"Exactly--a creaking hinge, if ever there was one.  Your inheritance
may be a long way off.  Dear me, how awkwardly situated you are!"

"I had some hopes, sir, that you, knowing all the facts, might be
inclined to advance----"

"Don't say another word, my dear boy," he cried, with the utmost
cordiality; "we shall talk it over tonight, and I give you my word that
whatever is in my power shall be done."

I was not sorry that my visit was drawing to a close, for it is
unpleasant to feel that there is one person in the house who eagerly
desires your departure.  Mrs. King's sallow face and forbidding eyes
had become more and more hateful to me.  She was no longer actively
rude--her fear of her husband prevented her--but she pushed her insane
jealousy to the extent of ignoring me, never addressing me, and in
every way making my stay at Greylands as uncomfortable as she could.
So offensive was her manner during that last day, that I should
certainly have left had it not been for that interview with my host in
the evening which would, I hoped, retrieve my broken fortunes.

It was very late when it occurred, for my relative, who had been
receiving even more telegrams than usual during the day, went off to
his study after dinner, and only emerged when the household had retired
to bed.  I heard him go round locking the doors, as custom was of a
night, and finally he joined me in the billiard-room. His stout figure
was wrapped in a dressing-gown, and he wore a pair of red Turkish
slippers without any heels.  Settling down into an arm-chair, he brewed
himself a glass of grog, in which I could not help noticing that the
whisky considerably predominated over the water.

"My word!" said he, "what a night!"

It was, indeed.  The wind was howling and screaming round the house,
and the latticed windows rattled and shook as if they were coming in.
The glow of the yellow lamps and the flavour of our cigars seemed the
brighter and more fragrant for the contrast.

"Now, my boy," said my host, "we have the house and the night to
ourselves.  Let me have an idea of how your affairs stand, and I will
see what can be done to set them in order.  I wish to hear every
detail."

Thus encouraged, I entered into a long exposition, in which all my
tradesmen and creditors from my landlord to my valet, figured in turn.
I had notes in my pocket-book, and I marshalled my facts, and gave, I
flatter myself, a very businesslike statement of my own unbusinesslike
ways and lamentable position.  I was depressed, however, to notice that
my companion's eyes were vacant and his attention elsewhere.  When he
did occasionally throw out a remark it was so entirely perfunctory and
pointless, that I was sure he had not in the least followed my remarks.
Every now and then he roused himself and put on some show of interest,
asking me to repeat or to explain more fully, but it was always to sink
once more into the same brown study.  At last he rose and threw the end
of his cigar into the grate.

"I'll tell you what, my boy," said he.  "I never had a head for
figures, so you will excuse me.  You must jot it all down upon paper,
and let me have a note of the amount.  I'll understand it when I see it
in black and white."

The proposal was encouraging.  I promised to do so.

"And now it's time we were in bed.  By Jove, there's one o'clock
striking in the hall."

The tingling of the chiming clock broke through the deep roar of the
gale.  The wind was sweeping past with the rush of a great river.

"I must see my cat before I go to bed," said my host.  "A high wind
excites him.  Will you come?"

"Certainly," said I.

"Then tread softly and don't speak, for everyone is asleep."

We passed quietly down the lamp-lit Persian-rugged hall, and through
the door at the farther end.  All was dark in the stone corridor, but a
stable lantern hung on a hook, and my host took it down and lit it.
There was no grating visible in the passage, so I knew that the beast
was in its cage.

"Come in!" said my relative, and opened the door.

A deep growling as we entered showed that the storm had really excited
the creature.  In the flickering light of the lantern, we saw it, a
huge black mass coiled in the corner of its den and throwing a squat,
uncouth shadow upon the whitewashed wall.  Its tail switched angrily
among the straw.

"Poor Tommy is not in the best of tempers," said Everard King, holding
up the lantern and looking in at him.  "What a black devil he looks,
doesn't he?  I must give him a little supper to put him in a better
humour.  Would you mind holding the lantern for a moment?"

I took it from his hand and he stepped to the door.

"His larder is just outside here," said he.  "You will excuse me for an
instant won't you?"  He passed out, and the door shut with a sharp
metallic click behind him.

That hard crisp sound made my heart stand still.  A sudden wave of
terror passed over me.  A vague perception of some monstrous treachery
turned me cold.  I sprang to the door, but there was no handle upon the
inner side.

"Here!" I cried.  "Let me out!"

"All right!  Don't make a row!" said my host from the passage. "You've
got the light all right."

"Yes, but I don't care about being locked in alone like this."

"Don't you?" I heard his hearty, chuckling laugh.  "You won't be alone
long."

"Let me out, sir!" I repeated angrily.  "I tell you I don't allow
practical jokes of this sort."

"Practical is the word," said he, with another hateful chuckle. And
then suddenly I heard, amidst the roar of the storm, the creak and
whine of the winch-handle turning and the rattle of the grating as it
passed through the slot.  Great God, he was letting loose the Brazilian
cat!

In the light of the lantern I saw the bars sliding slowly before me.
Already there was an opening a foot wide at the farther end.  With a
scream I seized the last bar with my hands and pulled with the strength
of a madman.  I WAS a madman with rage and horror.  For a minute or
more I held the thing motionless.  I knew that he was straining with
all his force upon the handle, and that the leverage was sure to
overcome me.  I gave inch by inch, my feet sliding along the stones,
and all the time I begged and prayed this inhuman monster to save me
from this horrible death.  I conjured him by his kinship.  I reminded
him that I was his guest; I begged to know what harm I had ever done
him.  His only answers were the tugs and jerks upon the handle, each of
which, in spite of all my struggles, pulled another bar through the
opening.  Clinging and clutching, I was dragged across the whole front
of the cage, until at last, with aching wrists and lacerated fingers, I
gave up the hopeless struggle.  The grating clanged back as I released
it, and an instant later I heard the shuffle of the Turkish slippers in
the passage, and the slam of the distant door.  Then everything was
silent.

The creature had never moved during this time.  He lay still in the
corner, and his tail had ceased switching.  This apparition of a man
adhering to his bars and dragged screaming across him had apparently
filled him with amazement.  I saw his great eyes staring steadily at
me.  I had dropped the lantern when I seized the bars, but it still
burned upon the floor, and I made a movement to grasp it, with some
idea that its light might protect me.  But the instant I moved, the
beast gave a deep and menacing growl.  I stopped and stood still,
quivering with fear in every limb.  The cat (if one may call so fearful
a creature by so homely a name) was not more than ten feet from me.
The eyes glimmered like two disks of phosphorus in the darkness.  They
appalled and yet fascinated me.  I could not take my own eyes from
them.  Nature plays strange tricks with us at such moments of
intensity, and those glimmering lights waxed and waned with a steady
rise and fall.  Sometimes they seemed to be tiny points of extreme
brilliancy--little electric sparks in the black obscurity--then they
would widen and widen until all that corner of the room was filled with
their shifting and sinister light.  And then suddenly they went out
altogether.

The beast had closed its eyes.  I do not know whether there may be any
truth in the old idea of the dominance of the human gaze, or whether
the huge cat was simply drowsy, but the fact remains that, far from
showing any symptom of attacking me, it simply rested its sleek, black
head upon its huge forepaws and seemed to sleep.  I stood, fearing to
move lest I should rouse it into malignant life once more.  But at
least I was able to think clearly now that the baleful eyes were off
me.  Here I was shut up for the night with the ferocious beast.  My own
instincts, to say nothing of the words of the plausible villain who
laid this trap for me, warned me that the animal was as savage as its
master.  How could I stave it off until morning?  The door was
hopeless, and so were the narrow, barred windows.  There was no shelter
anywhere in the bare, stone-flagged room.  To cry for assistance was
absurd.  I knew that this den was an outhouse, and that the corridor
which connected it with the house was at least a hundred feet long.
Besides, with the gale thundering outside, my cries were not likely to
be heard.  I had only my own courage and my own wits to trust to.

And then, with a fresh wave of horror, my eyes fell upon the lantern.
The candle had burned low, and was already beginning to gutter.  In ten
minutes it would be out.  I had only ten minutes then in which to do
something, for I felt that if I were once left in the dark with that
fearful beast I should be incapable of action.  The very thought of it
paralysed me.  I cast my despairing eyes round this chamber of death,
and they rested upon one spot which seemed to promise I will not say
safety, but less immediate and imminent danger than the open floor.

I have said that the cage had a top as well as a front, and this top
was left standing when the front was wound through the slot in the
wall.  It consisted of bars at a few inches' interval, with stout wire
netting between, and it rested upon a strong stanchion at each end.  It
stood now as a great barred canopy over the crouching figure in the
corner.  The space between this iron shelf and the roof may have been
from two or three feet.  If I could only get up there, squeezed in
between bars and ceiling, I should have only one vulnerable side.  I
should be safe from below, from behind, and from each side.  Only on
the open face of it could I be attacked.  There, it is true, I had no
protection whatever; but at least, I should be out of the brute's path
when he began to pace about his den.  He would have to come out of his
way to reach me.  It was now or never, for if once the light were out
it would be impossible.  With a gulp in my throat I sprang up, seized
the iron edge of the top, and swung myself panting on to it.  I writhed
in face downwards, and found myself looking straight into the terrible
eyes and yawning jaws of the cat.  Its fetid breath came up into my
face like the steam from some foul pot.

It appeared, however, to be rather curious than angry.  With a sleek
ripple of its long, black back it rose, stretched itself, and then
rearing itself on its hind legs, with one forepaw against the wall, it
raised the other, and drew its claws across the wire meshes beneath me.
One sharp, white hook tore through my trousers--for I may mention that
I was still in evening dress--and dug a furrow in my knee.  It was not
meant as an attack, but rather as an experiment, for upon my giving a
sharp cry of pain he dropped down again, and springing lightly into the
room, he began walking swiftly round it, looking up every now and again
in my direction. For my part I shuffled backwards until I lay with my
back against the wall, screwing myself into the smallest space
possible.  The farther I got the more difficult it was for him to
attack me.

He seemed more excited now that he had begun to move about, and he ran
swiftly and noiselessly round and round the den, passing continually
underneath the iron couch upon which I lay.  It was wonderful to see so
great a bulk passing like a shadow, with hardly the softest thudding of
velvety pads.  The candle was burning low--so low that I could hardly
see the creature.  And then, with a last flare and splutter it went out
altogether.  I was alone with the cat in the dark!

It helps one to face a danger when one knows that one has done all that
possibly can be done.  There is nothing for it then but to quietly
await the result.  In this case, there was no chance of safety anywhere
except the precise spot where I was.  I stretched myself out,
therefore, and lay silently, almost breathlessly, hoping that the beast
might forget my presence if I did nothing to remind him.  I reckoned
that it must already be two o'clock.  At four it would be full dawn.  I
had not more than two hours to wait for daylight.

Outside, the storm was still raging, and the rain lashed continually
against the little windows.  Inside, the poisonous and fetid air was
overpowering.  I could neither hear nor see the cat. I tried to think
about other things--but only one had power enough to draw my mind from
my terrible position.  That was the contemplation of my cousin's
villainy, his unparalleled hypocrisy, his malignant hatred of me.
Beneath that cheerful face there lurked the spirit of a mediaeval
assassin.  And as I thought of it I saw more clearly how cunningly the
thing had been arranged.  He had apparently gone to bed with the
others.  No doubt he had his witness to prove it.  Then, unknown to
them, he had slipped down, had lured me into his den and abandoned me.
His story would be so simple.  He had left me to finish my cigar in the
billiard-room. I had gone down on my own account to have a last look at
the cat. I had entered the room without observing that the cage was
opened, and I had been caught.  How could such a crime be brought home
to him?  Suspicion, perhaps--but proof, never!

How slowly those dreadful two hours went by!  Once I heard a low,
rasping sound, which I took to be the creature licking its own fur.
Several times those greenish eyes gleamed at me through the darkness,
but never in a fixed stare, and my hopes grew stronger that my presence
had been forgotten or ignored.  At last the least faint glimmer of
light came through the windows--I first dimly saw them as two grey
squares upon the black wall, then grey turned to white, and I could see
my terrible companion once more.  And he, alas, could see me!

It was evident to me at once that he was in a much more dangerous and
aggressive mood than when I had seen him last.  The cold of the morning
had irritated him, and he was hungry as well. With a continual growl he
paced swiftly up and down the side of the room which was farthest from
my refuge, his whiskers bristling angrily, and his tail switching and
lashing.  As he turned at the corners his savage eyes always looked
upwards at me with a dreadful menace.  I knew then that he meant to
kill me.  Yet I found myself even at that moment admiring the sinuous
grace of the devilish thing, its long, undulating, rippling movements,
the gloss of its beautiful flanks, the vivid, palpitating scarlet of
the glistening tongue which hung from the jet-black muzzle.  And all
the time that deep, threatening growl was rising and rising in an
unbroken crescendo.  I knew that the crisis was at hand.

It was a miserable hour to meet such a death--so cold, so comfortless,
shivering in my light dress clothes upon this gridiron of torment upon
which I was stretched.  I tried to brace myself to it, to raise my soul
above it, and at the same time, with the lucidity which comes to a
perfectly desperate man, I cast round for some possible means of
escape.  One thing was clear to me.  If that front of the cage was only
back in its position once more, I could find a sure refuge behind it.
Could I possibly pull it back?  I hardly dared to move for fear of
bringing the creature upon me. Slowly, very slowly, I put my hand
forward until it grasped the edge of the front, the final bar which
protruded through the wall. To my surprise it came quite easily to my
jerk.  Of course the difficulty of drawing it out arose from the fact
that I was clinging to it.  I pulled again, and three inches of it came
through.  It ran apparently on wheels.  I pulled again ... and then
the cat sprang!

It was so quick, so sudden, that I never saw it happen.  I simply heard
the savage snarl, and in an instant afterwards the blazing yellow eyes,
the flattened black head with its red tongue and flashing teeth, were
within reach of me.  The impact of the creature shook the bars upon
which I lay, until I thought (as far as I could think of anything at
such a moment) that they were coming down.  The cat swayed there for an
instant, the head and front paws quite close to me, the hind paws
clawing to find a grip upon the edge of the grating.  I heard the claws
rasping as they clung to the wire-netting, and the breath of the beast
made me sick.  But its bound had been miscalculated.  It could not
retain its position.  Slowly, grinning with rage, and scratching madly
at the bars, it swung backwards and dropped heavily upon the floor.
With a growl it instantly faced round to me and crouched for another
spring.

I knew that the next few moments would decide my fate.  The creature
had learned by experience.  It would not miscalculate again.  I must
act promptly, fearlessly, if I were to have a chance for life.  In an
instant I had formed my plan.  Pulling off my dress-coat, I threw it
down over the head of the beast.  At the same moment I dropped over the
edge, seized the end of the front grating, and pulled it frantically
out of the wall.

It came more easily than I could have expected.  I rushed across the
room, bearing it with me; but, as I rushed, the accident of my position
put me upon the outer side.  Had it been the other way, I might have
come off scathless.  As it was, there was a moment's pause as I stopped
it and tried to pass in through the opening which I had left.  That
moment was enough to give time to the creature to toss off the coat
with which I had blinded him and to spring upon me.  I hurled myself
through the gap and pulled the rails to behind me, but he seized my leg
before I could entirely withdraw it.  One stroke of that huge paw tore
off my calf as a shaving of wood curls off before a plane.  The next
moment, bleeding and fainting, I was lying among the foul straw with a
line of friendly bars between me and the creature which ramped so
frantically against them.

Too wounded to move, and too faint to be conscious of fear, I could
only lie, more dead than alive, and watch it.  It pressed its broad,
black chest against the bars and angled for me with its crooked paws as
I have seen a kitten do before a mouse-trap.  It ripped my clothes,
but, stretch as it would, it could not quite reach me.  I have heard of
the curious numbing effect produced by wounds from the great carnivora,
and now I was destined to experience it, for I had lost all sense of
personality, and was as interested in the cat's failure or success as
if it were some game which I was watching.  And then gradually my mind
drifted away into strange vague dreams, always with that black face and
red tongue coming back into them, and so I lost myself in the nirvana
of delirium, the blessed relief of those who are too sorely tried.

Tracing the course of events afterwards, I conclude that I must have
been insensible for about two hours.  What roused me to consciousness
once more was that sharp metallic click which had been the precursor of
my terrible experience.  It was the shooting back of the spring lock.
Then, before my senses were clear enough to entirely apprehend what
they saw, I was aware of the round, benevolent face of my cousin
peering in through the open door. What he saw evidently amazed him.
There was the cat crouching on the floor.  I was stretched upon my back
in my shirt-sleeves within the cage, my trousers torn to ribbons and a
great pool of blood all round me.  I can see his amazed face now, with
the morning sunlight upon it.  He peered at me, and peered again.  Then
he closed the door behind him, and advanced to the cage to see if I
were really dead.

I cannot undertake to say what happened.  I was not in a fit state to
witness or to chronicle such events.  I can only say that I was
suddenly conscious that his face was away from me--that he was looking
towards the animal.

"Good old Tommy!" he cried.  "Good old Tommy!"

Then he came near the bars, with his back still towards me.

"Down, you stupid beast!" he roared.  "Down, sir!  Don't you know your
master?"

Suddenly even in my bemuddled brain a remembrance came of those words
of his when he had said that the taste of blood would turn the cat into
a fiend.  My blood had done it, but he was to pay the price.

"Get away!" he screamed.  "Get away, you devil!  Baldwin! Baldwin!  Oh,
my God!"

And then I heard him fall, and rise, and fall again, with a sound like
the ripping of sacking.  His screams grew fainter until they were lost
in the worrying snarl.  And then, after I thought that he was dead, I
saw, as in a nightmare, a blinded, tattered, blood-soaked figure
running wildly round the room--and that was the last glimpse which I
had of him before I fainted once again.


I was many months in my recovery--in fact, I cannot say that I have
ever recovered, for to the end of my days I shall carry a stick as a
sign of my night with the Brazilian cat.  Baldwin, the groom, and the
other servants could not tell what had occurred, when, drawn by the
death-cries of their master, they found me behind the bars, and his
remains--or what they afterwards discovered to be his remains--in the
clutch of the creature which he had reared.  They stalled him off with
hot irons, and afterwards shot him through the loophole of the door
before they could finally extricate me.  I was carried to my bedroom,
and there, under the roof of my would-be murderer, I remained between
life and death for several weeks.  They had sent for a surgeon from
Clipton and a nurse from London, and in a month I was able to be
carried to the station, and so conveyed back once more to Grosvenor
Mansions.

I have one remembrance of that illness, which might have been part of
the ever-changing panorama conjured up by a delirious brain were it not
so definitely fixed in my memory.  One night, when the nurse was
absent, the door of my chamber opened, and a tall woman in blackest
mourning slipped into the room.  She came across to me, and as she bent
her sallow face I saw by the faint gleam of the night-light that it was
the Brazilian woman whom my cousin had married.  She stared intently
into my face, and her expression was more kindly than I had ever seen
it.

"Are you conscious?" she asked.

I feebly nodded--for I was still very weak.

"Well; then, I only wished to say to you that you have yourself to
blame.  Did I not do all I could for you?  From the beginning I tried
to drive you from the house.  By every means, short of betraying my
husband, I tried to save you from him.  I knew that he had a reason for
bringing you here.  I knew that he would never let you get away again.
No one knew him as I knew him, who had suffered from him so often.  I
did not dare to tell you all this. He would have killed me.  But I did
my best for you.  As things have turned out, you have been the best
friend that I have ever had.  You have set me free, and I fancied that
nothing but death would do that.  I am sorry if you are hurt, but I
cannot reproach myself.  I told you that you were a fool--and a fool
you have been."  She crept out of the room, the bitter, singular woman,
and I was never destined to see her again.  With what remained from her
husband's property she went back to her native land, and I have heard
that she afterwards took the veil at Pernambuco.

It was not until I had been back in London for some time that the
doctors pronounced me to be well enough to do business.  It was not a
very welcome permission to me, for I feared that it would be the signal
for an inrush of creditors; but it was Summers, my lawyer, who first
took advantage of it.

"I am very glad to see that your lordship is so much better," said he.
"I have been waiting a long time to offer my congratulations."

"What do you mean, Summers?  This is no time for joking."

"I mean what I say," he answered.  "You have been Lord Southerton for
the last six weeks, but we feared that it would retard your recovery if
you were to learn it."

Lord Southerton!  One of the richest peers in England!  I could not
believe my ears.  And then suddenly I thought of the time which had
elapsed, and how it coincided with my injuries.

"Then Lord Southerton must have died about the same time that I was
hurt?"

"His death occurred upon that very day."  Summers looked hard at me as
I spoke, and I am convinced--for he was a very shrewd fellow--that he
had guessed the true state of the case.  He paused for a moment as if
awaiting a confidence from me, but I could not see what was to be
gained by exposing such a family scandal.

"Yes, a very curious coincidence," he continued, with the same knowing
look.  "Of course, you are aware that your cousin Everard King was the
next heir to the estates.  Now, if it had been you instead of him who
had been torn to pieces by this tiger, or whatever it was, then of
course he would have been Lord Southerton at the present moment."

"No doubt," said I.

"And he took such an interest in it," said Summers.  "I happen to know
that the late Lord Southerton's valet was in his pay, and that he used
to have telegrams from him every few hours to tell him how he was
getting on.  That would be about the time when you were down there.
Was it not strange that he should wish to be so well informed, since he
knew that he was not the direct heir?"

"Very strange," said I.  "And now, Summers, if you will bring me my
bills and a new cheque-book, we will begin to get things into order."




Tales of Mystery



The Lost Special

The confession of Herbert de Lernac, now lying under sentence of death
at Marseilles, has thrown a light upon one of the most inexplicable
crimes of the century--an incident which is, I believe, absolutely
unprecedented in the criminal annals of any country: Although there is
a reluctance to discuss the matter in official circles, and little
information has been given to the Press, there are still indications
that the statement of this arch-criminal is corroborated by the facts,
and that we have at last found a solution for a most astounding
business.  As the matter is eight years old, and as its importance was
somewhat obscured by a political crisis which was engaging the public
attention at the time, it may be as well to state the facts as far as
we have been able to ascertain them.  They are collated from the
Liverpool papers of that date, from the proceedings at the inquest upon
John Slater, the engine-driver, and from the records of the London and
West Coast Railway Company, which have been courteously put at my
disposal.  Briefly, they are as follows:

On the 3rd of June, 1890, a gentleman, who gave his name as Monsieur
Louis Caratal, desired an interview with Mr. James Bland, the
superintendent of the London and West Coast Central Station in
Liverpool.  He was a small man, middle-aged and dark, with a stoop
which was so marked that it suggested some deformity of the spine. He
was accompanied by a friend, a man of imposing physique, whose
deferential manner and constant attention showed that his position was
one of dependence.  This friend or companion, whose name did not
transpire, was certainly a foreigner, and probably from his swarthy
complexion, either a Spaniard or a South American.  One peculiarity was
observed in him.  He carried in his left hand a small black, leather
dispatch box, and it was noticed by a sharp-eyed clerk in the Central
office that this box was fastened to his wrist by a strap.  No
importance was attached to the fact at the time, but subsequent events
endowed it with some significance. Monsieur Caratal was shown up to Mr.
Bland's office, while his companion remained outside.

Monsieur Caratal's business was quickly dispatched.  He had arrived
that afternoon from Central America.  Affairs of the utmost importance
demanded that he should be in Paris without the loss of an unnecessary
hour.  He had missed the London express.  A special must be provided.
Money was of no importance.  Time was everything.  If the company would
speed him on his way, they might make their own terms.

Mr. Bland struck the electric bell, summoned Mr. Potter Hood, the
traffic manager, and had the matter arranged in five minutes. The train
would start in three-quarters of an hour.  It would take that time to
insure that the line should be clear.  The powerful engine called
Rochdale (No. 247 on the company's register) was attached to two
carriages, with a guard's van behind.  The first carriage was solely
for the purpose of decreasing the inconvenience arising from the
oscillation.  The second was divided, as usual, into four compartments,
a first-class, a first-class smoking, a second-class, and a
second-class smoking.  The first compartment, which was nearest to the
engine, was the one allotted to the travellers.  The other three were
empty.  The guard of the special train was James McPherson, who had
been some years in the service of the company.  The stoker, William
Smith, was a new hand.

Monsieur Caratal, upon leaving the superintendent's office, rejoined
his companion, and both of them manifested extreme impatience to be
off.  Having paid the money asked, which amounted to fifty pounds five
shillings, at the usual special rate of five shillings a mile, they
demanded to be shown the carriage, and at once took their seats in it,
although they were assured that the better part of an hour must elapse
before the line could be cleared.  In the meantime a singular
coincidence had occurred in the office which Monsieur Caratal had just
quitted.

A request for a special is not a very uncommon circumstance in a rich
commercial centre, but that two should be required upon the same
afternoon was most unusual.  It so happened, however, that Mr. Bland
had hardly dismissed the first traveller before a second entered with a
similar request.  This was a Mr. Horace Moore, a gentlemanly man of
military appearance, who alleged that the sudden serious illness of his
wife in London made it absolutely imperative that he should not lose an
instant in starting upon the journey.  His distress and anxiety were so
evident that Mr. Bland did all that was possible to meet his wishes.  A
second special was out of the question, as the ordinary local service
was already somewhat deranged by the first.  There was the alternative,
however, that Mr. Moore should share the expense of Monsieur Caratal's
train, and should travel in the other empty first-class compartment, if
Monsieur Caratal objected to having him in the one which he occupied.
It was difficult to see any objection to such an arrangement, and yet
Monsieur Caratal, upon the suggestion being made to him by Mr. Potter
Hood, absolutely refused to consider it for an instant.  The train was
his, he said, and he would insist upon the exclusive use of it.  All
argument failed to overcome his ungracious objections, and finally the
plan had to be abandoned. Mr. Horace Moore left the station in great
distress, after learning that his only course was to take the ordinary
slow train which leaves Liverpool at six o'clock.  At four thirty-one
exactly by the station clock the special train, containing the crippled
Monsieur Caratal and his gigantic companion, steamed out of the
Liverpool station.  The line was at that time clear, and there should
have been no stoppage before Manchester.

The trains of the London and West Coast Railway run over the lines of
another company as far as this town, which should have been reached by
the special rather before six o'clock.  At a quarter after six
considerable surprise and some consternation were caused amongst the
officials at Liverpool by the receipt of a telegram from Manchester to
say that it had not yet arrived.  An inquiry directed to St. Helens,
which is a third of the way between the two cities, elicited the
following reply--


"To James Bland, Superintendent, Central L. & W. C.,
Liverpool.--Special passed here at 4:52, well up to time.--Dowster, St.
Helens."


This telegram was received at six-forty.  At six-fifty a second message
was received from Manchester--


"No sign of special as advised by you."


And then ten minutes later a third, more bewildering--


"Presume some mistake as to proposed running of special.  Local train
from St. Helens timed to follow it has just arrived and has seen
nothing of it.  Kindly wire advices.--Manchester."


The matter was assuming a most amazing aspect, although in some
respects the last telegram was a relief to the authorities at
Liverpool.  If an accident had occurred to the special, it seemed
hardly possible that the local train could have passed down the same
line without observing it.  And yet, what was the alternative? Where
could the train be?  Had it possibly been sidetracked for some reason
in order to allow the slower train to go past?  Such an explanation was
possible if some small repair had to be effected. A telegram was
dispatched to each of the stations between St. Helens and Manchester,
and the superintendent and traffic manager waited in the utmost
suspense at the instrument for the series of replies which would enable
them to say for certain what had become of the missing train.  The
answers came back in the order of questions, which was the order of the
stations beginning at the St. Helens end--

"Special passed here five o'clock.--Collins Green."

"Special passed here six past five.--Earlstown."

"Special passed here 5:10.--Newton."

"Special passed here 5:20.--Kenyon Junction."

"No special train has passed here.--Barton Moss."

The two officials stared at each other in amazement.

"This is unique in my thirty years of experience," said Mr. Bland.

"Absolutely unprecedented and inexplicable, sir.  The special has gone
wrong between Kenyon Junction and Barton Moss."

"And yet there is no siding, so far as my memory serves me, between the
two stations.  The special must have run off the metals."

"But how could the four-fifty parliamentary pass over the same line
without observing it?"

"There's no alternative, Mr. Hood.  It must be so. Possibly the local
train may have observed something which may throw some light upon the
matter.  We will wire to Manchester for more information, and to Kenyon
Junction with instructions that the line be examined instantly as far
as Barton Moss." The answer from Manchester came within a few minutes.

"No news of missing special.  Driver and guard of slow train positive
no accident between Kenyon Junction and Barton Moss. Line quite clear,
and no sign of anything unusual.--Manchester."

"That driver and guard will have to go," said Mr. Bland, grimly.
"There has been a wreck and they have missed it.  The special has
obviously run off the metals without disturbing the line--how it could
have done so passes my comprehension--but so it must be, and we shall
have a wire from Kenyon or Barton Moss presently to say that they have
found her at the bottom of an embankment."

But Mr. Bland's prophecy was not destined to be fulfilled. Half an hour
passed, and then there arrived the following message from the
station-master of Kenyon Junction--


"There are no traces of the missing special.  It is quite certain that
she passed here, and that she did not arrive at Barton Moss.  We have
detached engine from goods train, and I have myself ridden down the
line, but all is clear, and there is no sign of any accident."


Mr. Bland tore his hair in his perplexity.

"This is rank lunacy, Hood!" he cried.  "Does a train vanish into thin
air in England in broad daylight?  The thing is preposterous.  An
engine, a tender, two carriages, a van, five human beings--and all lost
on a straight line of railway!  Unless we get something positive within
the next hour I'll take Inspector Collins, and go down myself."

And then at last something positive did occur.  It took the shape of
another telegram from Kenyon Junction.

"Regret to report that the dead body of John Slater, driver of the
special train, has just been found among the gorse bushes at a point
two and a quarter miles from the Junction.  Had fallen from his engine,
pitched down the embankment, and rolled among the bushes.  Injuries to
his head, from the fall, appear to be cause of death.  Ground has now
been carefully examined, and there is no trace of the missing train."

The country was, as has already been stated, in the throes of a
political crisis, and the attention of the public was further
distracted by the important and sensational developments in Paris,
where a huge scandal threatened to destroy the Government and to wreck
the reputations of many of the leading men in France. The papers were
full of these events, and the singular disappearance of the special
train attracted less attention than would have been the case in more
peaceful times.  The grotesque nature of the event helped to detract
from its importance, for the papers were disinclined to believe the
facts as reported to them. More than one of the London journals treated
the matter as an ingenious hoax, until the coroner's inquest upon the
unfortunate driver (an inquest which elicited nothing of importance)
convinced them of the tragedy of the incident.

Mr. Bland, accompanied by Inspector Collins, the senior detective
officer in the service of the company, went down to Kenyon Junction the
same evening, and their research lasted throughout the following day,
but was attended with purely negative results.  Not only was no trace
found of the missing train, but no conjecture could be put forward
which could possibly explain the facts.  At the same time, Inspector
Collins's official report (which lies before me as I write) served to
show that the possibilities were more numerous than might have been
expected.

"In the stretch of railway between these two points," said he, "the
country is dotted with ironworks and collieries.  Of these, some are
being worked and some have been abandoned.  There are no fewer than
twelve which have small-gauge lines which run trolly-cars down to the
main line.  These can, of course, be disregarded. Besides these,
however, there are seven which have, or have had, proper lines running
down and connecting with points to the main line, so as to convey their
produce from the mouth of the mine to the great centres of
distribution.  In every case these lines are only a few miles in
length.  Out of the seven, four belong to collieries which are worked
out, or at least to shafts which are no longer used.  These are the
Redgauntlet, Hero, Slough of Despond, and Heartsease mines, the latter
having ten years ago been one of the principal mines in Lancashire.
These four side lines may be eliminated from our inquiry, for, to
prevent possible accidents, the rails nearest to the main line have
been taken up, and there is no longer any connection.  There remain
three other side lines leading--

  (a) To the Carnstock Iron Works;
  (b) To the Big Ben Colliery;
  (c) To the Perseverance Colliery.


"Of these the Big Ben line is not more than a quarter of a mile long,
and ends at a dead wall of coal waiting removal from the mouth of the
mine.  Nothing had been seen or heard there of any special.  The
Carnstock Iron Works line was blocked all day upon the 3rd of June by
sixteen truckloads of hematite.  It is a single line, and nothing could
have passed.  As to the Perseverance line, it is a large double line,
which does a considerable traffic, for the output of the mine is very
large.  On the 3rd of June this traffic proceeded as usual; hundreds of
men including a gang of railway platelayers were working along the two
miles and a quarter which constitute the total length of the line, and
it is inconceivable that an unexpected train could have come down there
without attracting universal attention.  It may be remarked in
conclusion that this branch line is nearer to St. Helens than the point
at which the engine-driver was discovered, so that we have every reason
to believe that the train was past that point before misfortune
overtook her.

"As to John Slater, there is no clue to be gathered from his appearance
or injuries.  We can only say that, so far as we can see, he met his
end by falling off his engine, though why he fell, or what became of
the engine after his fall, is a question upon which I do not feel
qualified to offer an opinion."  In conclusion, the inspector offered
his resignation to the Board, being much nettled by an accusation of
incompetence in the London papers.

A month elapsed, during which both the police and the company
prosecuted their inquiries without the slightest success.  A reward was
offered and a pardon promised in case of crime, but they were both
unclaimed.  Every day the public opened their papers with the
conviction that so grotesque a mystery would at last be solved, but
week after week passed by, and a solution remained as far off as ever.
In broad daylight, upon a June afternoon in the most thickly inhabited
portion of England, a train with its occupants had disappeared as
completely as if some master of subtle chemistry had volatilized it
into gas.  Indeed, among the various conjectures which were put forward
in the public Press, there were some which seriously asserted that
supernatural, or, at least, preternatural, agencies had been at work,
and that the deformed Monsieur Caratal was probably a person who was
better known under a less polite name.  Others fixed upon his swarthy
companion as being the author of the mischief, but what it was exactly
which he had done could never be clearly formulated in words.

Amongst the many suggestions put forward by various newspapers or
private individuals, there were one or two which were feasible enough
to attract the attention of the public.  One which appeared in The
Times, over the signature of an amateur reasoner of some celebrity at
that date, attempted to deal with the matter in a critical and
semi-scientific manner.  An extract must suffice, although the curious
can see the whole letter in the issue of the 3rd of July.

"It is one of the elementary principles of practical reasoning," he
remarked, "that when the impossible has been eliminated the residuum,
HOWEVER IMPROBABLE, must contain the truth.  It is certain that the
train left Kenyon Junction.  It is certain that it did not reach Barton
Moss.  It is in the highest degree unlikely, but still possible, that
it may have taken one of the seven available side lines.  It is
obviously impossible for a train to run where there are no rails, and,
therefore, we may reduce our improbables to the three open lines,
namely the Carnstock Iron Works, the Big Ben, and the Perseverance.  Is
there a secret society of colliers, an English Camorra, which is
capable of destroying both train and passengers?  It is improbable, but
it is not impossible.  I confess that I am unable to suggest any other
solution.  I should certainly advise the company to direct all their
energies towards the observation of those three lines, and of the
workmen at the end of them.  A careful supervision of the pawnbrokers'
shops of the district might possibly bring some suggestive facts to
light."

The suggestion coming from a recognized authority upon such matters
created considerable interest, and a fierce opposition from those who
considered such a statement to be a preposterous libel upon an honest
and deserving set of men.  The only answer to this criticism was a
challenge to the objectors to lay any more feasible explanations before
the public.  In reply to this two others were forthcoming (Times, July
7th and 9th).  The first suggested that the train might have run off
the metals and be lying submerged in the Lancashire and Staffordshire
Canal, which runs parallel to the railway for some hundred of yards.
This suggestion was thrown out of court by the published depth of the
canal, which was entirely insufficient to conceal so large an object.
The second correspondent wrote calling attention to the bag which
appeared to be the sole luggage which the travellers had brought with
them, and suggesting that some novel explosive of immense and
pulverizing power might have been concealed in it.  The obvious
absurdity, however, of supposing that the whole train might be blown to
dust while the metals remained uninjured reduced any such explanation
to a farce.  The investigation had drifted into this hopeless position
when a new and most unexpected incident occurred.

This was nothing less than the receipt by Mrs. McPherson of a letter
from her husband, James McPherson, who had been the guard on the
missing train.  The letter, which was dated July 5th, 1890, was posted
from New York and came to hand upon July 14th.  Some doubts were
expressed as to its genuine character but Mrs. McPherson was positive
as to the writing, and the fact that it contained a remittance of a
hundred dollars in five-dollar notes was enough in itself to discount
the idea of a hoax.  No address was given in the letter, which ran in
this way:


MY DEAR WIFE,--

"I have been thinking a great deal, and I find it very hard to give you
up.  The same with Lizzie.  I try to fight against it, but it will
always come back to me.  I send you some money which will change into
twenty English pounds.  This should be enough to bring both Lizzie and
you across the Atlantic, and you will find the Hamburg boats which stop
at Southampton very good boats, and cheaper than Liverpool.  If you
could come here and stop at the Johnston House I would try and send you
word how to meet, but things are very difficult with me at present, and
I am not very happy, finding it hard to give you both up.  So no more
at present, from your loving husband,

"James McPherson."


For a time it was confidently anticipated that this letter would lead
to the clearing up of the whole matter, the more so as it was
ascertained that a passenger who bore a close resemblance to the
missing guard had travelled from Southampton under the name of Summers
in the Hamburg and New York liner Vistula, which started upon the 7th
of June.  Mrs. McPherson and her sister Lizzie Dolton went across to
New York as directed and stayed for three weeks at the Johnston House,
without hearing anything from the missing man.  It is probable that
some injudicious comments in the Press may have warned him that the
police were using them as a bait.  However, this may be, it is certain
that he neither wrote nor came, and the women were eventually compelled
to return to Liverpool.

And so the matter stood, and has continued to stand up to the present
year of 1898.  Incredible as it may seem, nothing has transpired during
these eight years which has shed the least light upon the extraordinary
disappearance of the special train which contained Monsieur Caratal and
his companion.  Careful inquiries into the antecedents of the two
travellers have only established the fact that Monsieur Caratal was
well known as a financier and political agent in Central America, and
that during his voyage to Europe he had betrayed extraordinary anxiety
to reach Paris.  His companion, whose name was entered upon the
passenger lists as Eduardo Gomez, was a man whose record was a violent
one, and whose reputation was that of a bravo and a bully.  There was
evidence to show, however, that he was honestly devoted to the
interests of Monsieur Caratal, and that the latter, being a man of puny
physique, employed the other as a guard and protector.  It may be added
that no information came from Paris as to what the objects of Monsieur
Caratal's hurried journey may have been.  This comprises all the facts
of the case up to the publication in the Marseilles papers of the
recent confession of Herbert de Lernac, now under sentence of death for
the murder of a merchant named Bonvalot. This statement may be
literally translated as follows:


"It is not out of mere pride or boasting that I give this information,
for, if that were my object, I could tell a dozen actions of mine which
are quite as splendid; but I do it in order that certain gentlemen in
Paris may understand that I, who am able here to tell about the fate of
Monsieur Caratal, can also tell in whose interest and at whose request
the deed was done, unless the reprieve which I am awaiting comes to me
very quickly.  Take warning, messieurs, before it is too late!  You
know Herbert de Lernac, and you are aware that his deeds are as ready
as his words. Hasten then, or you are lost!

"At present I shall mention no names--if you only heard the names, what
would you not think!--but I shall merely tell you how cleverly I did
it.  I was true to my employers then, and no doubt they will be true to
me now.  I hope so, and until I am convinced that they have betrayed
me, these names, which would convulse Europe, shall not be divulged.
But on that day ... well, I say no more!

"In a word, then, there was a famous trial in Paris, in the year 1890,
in connection with a monstrous scandal in politics and finance.  How
monstrous that scandal was can never be known save by such confidential
agents as myself.  The honour and careers of many of the chief men in
France were at stake.  You have seen a group of ninepins standing, all
so rigid, and prim, and unbending.  Then there comes the ball from far
away and pop, pop, pop--there are your ninepins on the floor.  Well,
imagine some of the greatest men in France as these ninepins and then
this Monsieur Caratal was the ball which could be seen coming from far
away.  If he arrived, then it was pop, pop, pop for all of them.  It
was determined that he should not arrive.

"I do not accuse them all of being conscious of what was to happen.
There were, as I have said, great financial as well as political
interests at stake, and a syndicate was formed to manage the business.
Some subscribed to the syndicate who hardly understood what were its
objects.  But others understood very well, and they can rely upon it
that I have not forgotten their names. They had ample warning that
Monsieur Caratal was coming long before he left South America, and they
knew that the evidence which he held would certainly mean ruin to all
of them.  The syndicate had the command of an unlimited amount of
money--absolutely unlimited, you understand.  They looked round for an
agent who was capable of wielding this gigantic power.  The man chosen
must be inventive, resolute, adaptive--a man in a million.  They chose
Herbert de Lernac, and I admit that they were right.

"My duties were to choose my subordinates, to use freely the power
which money gives, and to make certain that Monsieur Caratal should
never arrive in Paris.  With characteristic energy I set about my
commission within an hour of receiving my instructions, and the steps
which I took were the very best for the purpose which could possibly be
devised.

"A man whom I could trust was dispatched instantly to South America to
travel home with Monsieur Caratal.  Had he arrived in time the ship
would never have reached Liverpool; but alas! it had already started
before my agent could reach it.  I fitted out a small armed brig to
intercept it, but again I was unfortunate. Like all great organizers I
was, however, prepared for failure, and had a series of alternatives
prepared, one or the other of which must succeed.  You must not
underrate the difficulties of my undertaking, or imagine that a mere
commonplace assassination would meet the case.  We must destroy not
only Monsieur Caratal, but Monsieur Caratal's documents, and Monsieur
Caratal's companions also, if we had reason to believe that he had
communicated his secrets to them.  And you must remember that they were
on the alert, and keenly suspicious of any such attempt.  It was a task
which was in every way worthy of me, for I am always most masterful
where another would be appalled.

"I was all ready for Monsieur Caratal's reception in Liverpool, and I
was the more eager because I had reason to believe that he had made
arrangements by which he would have a considerable guard from the
moment that he arrived in London.  Anything which was to be done must
be done between the moment of his setting foot upon the Liverpool quay
and that of his arrival at the London and West Coast terminus in
London.  We prepared six plans, each more elaborate than the last;
which plan would be used would depend upon his own movements.  Do what
he would, we were ready for him.  If he had stayed in Liverpool, we
were ready.  If he took an ordinary train, an express, or a special,
all was ready.  Everything had been foreseen and provided for.

"You may imagine that I could not do all this myself.  What could I
know of the English railway lines?  But money can procure willing
agents all the world over, and I soon had one of the acutest brains in
England to assist me.  I will mention no names, but it would be unjust
to claim all the credit for myself. My English ally was worthy of such
an alliance.  He knew the London and West Coast line thoroughly, and he
had the command of a band of workers who were trustworthy and
intelligent.  The idea was his, and my own judgement was only required
in the details.  We bought over several officials, amongst whom the
most important was James McPherson, whom we had ascertained to be the
guard most likely to be employed upon a special train.  Smith, the
stoker, was also in our employ.  John Slater, the engine-driver, had
been approached, but had been found to be obstinate and dangerous, so
we desisted. We had no certainty that Monsieur Caratal would take a
special, but we thought it very probable, for it was of the utmost
importance to him that he should reach Paris without delay.  It was for
this contingency, therefore, that we made special
preparations--preparations which were complete down to the last detail
long before his steamer had sighted the shores of England.  You will be
amused to learn that there was one of my agents in the pilot-boat which
brought that steamer to its moorings.

"The moment that Caratal arrived in Liverpool we knew that he suspected
danger and was on his guard.  He had brought with him as an escort a
dangerous fellow, named Gomez, a man who carried weapons, and was
prepared to use them.  This fellow carried Caratal's confidential
papers for him, and was ready to protect either them or his master.
The probability was that Caratal had taken him into his counsel, and
that to remove Caratal without removing Gomez would be a mere waste of
energy.  It was necessary that they should be involved in a common
fate, and our plans to that end were much facilitated by their request
for a special train.  On that special train you will understand that
two out of the three servants of the company were really in our employ,
at a price which would make them independent for a lifetime.  I do not
go so far as to say that the English are more honest than any other
nation, but I have found them more expensive to buy.

"I have already spoken of my English agent--who is a man with a
considerable future before him, unless some complaint of the throat
carries him off before his time.  He had charge of all arrangements at
Liverpool, whilst I was stationed at the inn at Kenyon, where I awaited
a cipher signal to act.  When the special was arranged for, my agent
instantly telegraphed to me and warned me how soon I should have
everything ready.  He himself under the name of Horace Moore applied
immediately for a special also, in the hope that he would be sent down
with Monsieur Caratal, which might under certain circumstances have
been helpful to us.  If, for example, our great coup had failed, it
would then have become the duty of my agent to have shot them both and
destroyed their papers. Caratal was on his guard, however, and refused
to admit any other traveller.  My agent then left the station, returned
by another entrance, entered the guard's van on the side farthest from
the platform, and travelled down with McPherson the guard.

"In the meantime you will be interested to know what my movements were.
Everything had been prepared for days before, and only the finishing
touches were needed.  The side line which we had chosen had once joined
the main line, but it had been disconnected. We had only to replace a
few rails to connect it once more.  These rails had been laid down as
far as could be done without danger of attracting attention, and now it
was merely a case of completing a juncture with the line, and arranging
the points as they had been before.  The sleepers had never been
removed, and the rails, fish-plates and rivets were all ready, for we
had taken them from a siding on the abandoned portion of the line.
With my small but competent band of workers, we had everything ready
long before the special arrived.  When it did arrive, it ran off upon
the small side line so easily that the jolting of the points appears to
have been entirely unnoticed by the two travellers.

"Our plan had been that Smith, the stoker, should chloroform John
Slater, the driver, so that he should vanish with the others. In this
respect, and in this respect only, our plans miscarried--I except the
criminal folly of McPherson in writing home to his wife. Our stoker did
his business so clumsily that Slater in his struggles fell off the
engine, and though fortune was with us so far that he broke his neck in
the fall, still he remained as a blot upon that which would otherwise
have been one of those complete masterpieces which are only to be
contemplated in silent admiration.  The criminal expert will find in
John Slater the one flaw in all our admirable combinations.  A man who
has had as many triumphs as I can afford to be frank, and I therefore
lay my finger upon John Slater, and I proclaim him to be a flaw.

"But now I have got our special train upon the small line two
kilometres, or rather more than one mile, in length, which leads, or
rather used to lead, to the abandoned Heartsease mine, once one of the
largest coal mines in England.  You will ask how it is that no one saw
the train upon this unused line.  I answer that along its entire length
it runs through a deep cutting, and that, unless someone had been on
the edge of that cutting, he could not have seen it.  There WAS someone
on the edge of that cutting.  I was there.  And now I will tell you
what I saw.

"My assistant had remained at the points in order that he might
superintend the switching off of the train.  He had four armed men with
him, so that if the train ran off the line--we thought it probable,
because the points were very rusty--we might still have resources to
fall back upon.  Having once seen it safely on the side line, he handed
over the responsibility to me.  I was waiting at a point which
overlooks the mouth of the mine, and I was also armed, as were my two
companions.  Come what might, you see, I was always ready.

"The moment that the train was fairly on the side line, Smith, the
stoker, slowed-down the engine, and then, having turned it on to the
fullest speed again, he and McPherson, with my English lieutenant,
sprang off before it was too late.  It may be that it was this
slowing-down which first attracted the attention of the travellers, but
the train was running at full speed again before their heads appeared
at the open window.  It makes me smile to think how bewildered they
must have been.  Picture to yourself your own feelings if, on looking
out of your luxurious carriage, you suddenly perceived that the lines
upon which you ran were rusted and corroded, red and yellow with disuse
and decay!  What a catch must have come in their breath as in a second
it flashed upon them that it was not Manchester but Death which was
waiting for them at the end of that sinister line.  But the train was
running with frantic speed, rolling and rocking over the rotten line,
while the wheels made a frightful screaming sound upon the rusted
surface.  I was close to them, and could see their faces.  Caratal was
praying, I think--there was something like a rosary dangling out of his
hand.  The other roared like a bull who smells the blood of the
slaughter-house.  He saw us standing on the bank, and he beckoned to us
like a madman.  Then he tore at his wrist and threw his dispatch-box
out of the window in our direction.  Of course, his meaning was
obvious.  Here was the evidence, and they would promise to be silent if
their lives were spared.  It would have been very agreeable if we could
have done so, but business is business.  Besides, the train was now as
much beyond our controls as theirs.

"He ceased howling when the train rattled round the curve and they saw
the black mouth of the mine yawning before them.  We had removed the
boards which had covered it, and we had cleared the square entrance.
The rails had formerly run very close to the shaft for the convenience
of loading the coal, and we had only to add two or three lengths of
rail in order to lead to the very brink of the shaft.  In fact, as the
lengths would not quite fit, our line projected about three feet over
the edge.  We saw the two heads at the window: Caratal below, Gomez
above; but they had both been struck silent by what they saw.  And yet
they could not withdraw their heads.  The sight seemed to have
paralysed them.

"I had wondered how the train running at a great speed would take the
pit into which I had guided it, and I was much interested in watching
it.  One of my colleagues thought that it would actually jump it, and
indeed it was not very far from doing so. Fortunately, however, it fell
short, and the buffers of the engine struck the other lip of the shaft
with a tremendous crash.  The funnel flew off into the air.  The
tender, carriages, and van were all smashed up into one jumble, which,
with the remains of the engine, choked for a minute or so the mouth of
the pit.  Then something gave way in the middle, and the whole mass of
green iron, smoking coals, brass fittings, wheels, wood-work, and
cushions all crumbled together and crashed down into the mine.  We
heard the rattle, rattle, rattle, as the debris struck against the
walls, and then, quite a long time afterwards, there came a deep roar
as the remains of the train struck the bottom.  The boiler may have
burst, for a sharp crash came after the roar, and then a dense cloud of
steam and smoke swirled up out of the black depths, falling in a spray
as thick as rain all round us.  Then the vapour shredded off into thin
wisps, which floated away in the summer sunshine, and all was quiet
again in the Heartsease mine.

"And now, having carried out our plans so successfully, it only
remained to leave no trace behind us.  Our little band of workers at
the other end had already ripped up the rails and disconnected the side
line, replacing everything as it had been before.  We were equally busy
at the mine.  The funnel and other fragments were thrown in, the shaft
was planked over as it used to be, and the lines which led to it were
torn up and taken away.  Then, without flurry, but without delay, we
all made our way out of the country, most of us to Paris, my English
colleague to Manchester, and McPherson to Southampton, whence he
emigrated to America.  Let the English papers of that date tell how
throughly we had done our work, and how completely we had thrown the
cleverest of their detectives off our track.

"You will remember that Gomez threw his bag of papers out of the
window, and I need not say that I secured that bag and brought them to
my employers.  It may interest my employers now, however, to learn that
out of that bag I took one or two little papers as a souvenir of the
occasion.  I have no wish to publish these papers; but, still, it is
every man for himself in this world, and what else can I do if my
friends will not come to my aid when I want them?  Messieurs, you may
believe that Herbert de Lernac is quite as formidable when he is
against you as when he is with you, and that he is not a man to go to
the guillotine until he has seen that every one of you is en route for
New Caledonia.  For your own sake, if not for mine, make haste,
Monsieur de ----, and General ----, and Baron ---- (you can fill up the
blanks for yourselves as you read this).  I promise you that in the
next edition there will be no blanks to fill.

"P.S.--As I look over my statement there is only one omission which I
can see.  It concerns the unfortunate man McPherson, who was foolish
enough to write to his wife and to make an appointment with her in New
York.  It can be imagined that when interests like ours were at stake,
we could not leave them to the chance of whether a man in that class of
life would or would not give away his secrets to a woman.  Having once
broken his oath by writing to his wife, we could not trust him any
more.  We took steps therefore to insure that he should not see his
wife.  I have sometimes thought that it would be a kindness to write to
her and to assure her that there is no impediment to her marrying
again."



The Beetle-Hunter

A curious experience? said the Doctor.  Yes, my friends, I have had one
very curious experience.  I never expect to have another, for it is
against all doctrines of chances that two such events would befall any
one man in a single lifetime.  You may believe me or not, but the thing
happened exactly as I tell it.

I had just become a medical man, but I had not started in practice, and
I lived in rooms in Gower Street.  The street has been renumbered since
then, but it was in the only house which has a bow-window, upon the
left-hand side as you go down from the Metropolitan Station.  A widow
named Murchison kept the house at that time, and she had three medical
students and one engineer as lodgers.  I occupied the top room, which
was the cheapest, but cheap as it was it was more than I could afford.
My small resources were dwindling away, and every week it became more
necessary that I should find something to do.  Yet I was very unwilling
to go into general practice, for my tastes were all in the direction of
science, and especially of zoology, towards which I had always a strong
leaning.  I had almost given the fight up and resigned myself to being
a medical drudge for life, when the turning-point of my struggles came
in a very extraordinary way.

One morning I had picked up the Standard and was glancing over its
contents.  There was a complete absence of news, and I was about to
toss the paper down again, when my eyes were caught by an advertisement
at the head of the personal column.  It was worded in this way:


"Wanted for one or more days the services of a medical man.  It is
essential that he should be a man of strong physique, of steady nerves,
and of a resolute nature.  Must be an entomologist--coleopterist
preferred.  Apply, in person, at 77B, Brook Street. Application must be
made before twelve o'clock today."


Now, I have already said that I was devoted to zoology.  Of all
branches of zoology, the study of insects was the most attractive to
me, and of all insects beetles were the species with which I was most
familiar.  Butterfly collectors are numerous, but beetles are far more
varied, and more accessible in these islands than are butterflies.  It
was this fact which had attracted my attention to them, and I had
myself made a collection which numbered some hundred varieties.  As to
the other requisites of the advertisement, I knew that my nerves could
be depended upon, and I had won the weight-throwing competition at the
inter-hospital sports.  Clearly, I was the very man for the vacancy.
Within five minutes of my having read the advertisement I was in a cab
and on my was to Brook Street.

As I drove, I kept turning the matter over in my head and trying to
make a guess as to what sort of employment it could be which needed
such curious qualifications.  A strong physique, a resolute nature, a
medical training, and a knowledge of beetles--what connection could
there be between these various requisites? And then there was the
disheartening fact that the situation was not a permanent one, but
terminable from day to day, according to the terms of the
advertisement.  The more I pondered over it the more unintelligible did
it become; but at the end of my meditations I always came back to the
ground fact that, come what might, I had nothing to lose, that I was
completely at the end of my resources, and that I was ready for any
adventure, however desperate, which would put a few honest sovereigns
into my pocket.  The man fears to fail who has to pay for his failure,
but there was no penalty which Fortune could exact from me.  I was like
the gambler with empty pockets, who is still allowed to try his luck
with the others.

No. 77B, Brook Street, was one of those dingy and yet imposing houses,
dun-coloured and flat-faced, with the intensely respectable and solid
air which marks the Georgian builder.  As I alighted from the cab, a
young man came out of the door and walked swiftly down the street.  In
passing me, I noticed that he cast an inquisitive and somewhat
malevolent glance at me, and I took the incident as a good omen, for
his appearance was that of a rejected candidate, and if he resented my
application it meant that the vacancy was not yet filled up.  Full of
hope, I ascended the broad steps and rapped with the heavy knocker.

A footman in powder and livery opened the door.  Clearly I was in touch
with the people of wealth and fashion.


"Yes, sir?" said the footman.

"I came in answer to----"

"Quite so, sir," said the footman.  "Lord Linchmere will see you at
once in the library."

Lord Linchmere!  I had vaguely heard the name, but could not for the
instant recall anything about him.  Following the footman, I was shown
into a large, book-lined room in which there was seated behind a
writing-desk a small man with a pleasant, clean-shaven, mobile face,
and long hair shot with grey, brushed back from his forehead.  He
looked me up and down with a very shrewd, penetrating glance, holding
the card which the footman had given him in his right hand.  Then he
smiled pleasantly, and I felt that externally at any rate I possessed
the qualifications which he desired.

"You have come in answer to my advertisement, Dr. Hamilton?" he asked.

"Yes, sir."

"Do you fulfil the conditions which are there laid down?"

"I believe that I do."

"You are a powerful man, or so I should judge from your appearance.

"I think that I am fairly strong."

"And resolute?"

"I believe so."

"Have you ever known what it was to be exposed to imminent danger?"

"No, I don't know that I ever have."

"But you think you would be prompt and cool at such a time?"

"I hope so."

"Well, I believe that you would.  I have the more confidence in you
because you do not pretend to be certain as to what you would do in a
position that was new to you.  My impression is that, so far as
personal qualities go, you are the very man of whom I am in search.
That being settled, we may pass on to the next point."

"Which is?"

"To talk to me about beetles."

I looked across to see if he was joking, but, on the contrary, he was
leaning eagerly forward across his desk, and there was an expression of
something like anxiety in his eyes.

"I am afraid that you do not know about beetles," he cried.

"On the contrary, sir, it is the one scientific subject about which I
feel that I really do know something."

"I am overjoyed to hear it.  Please talk to me about beetles."

I talked.  I do not profess to have said anything original upon the
subject, but I gave a short sketch of the characteristics of the
beetle, and ran over the more common species, with some allusions to
the specimens in my own little collection and to the article upon
"Burying Beetles" which I had contributed to the Journal of
Entomological Science.

"What! not a collector?" cried Lord Linchmere.  "You don't mean that
you are yourself a collector?"  His eyes danced with pleasure at the
thought.

"You are certainly the very man in London for my purpose.  I thought
that among five millions of people there must be such a man, but the
difficulty is to lay one's hands upon him.  I have been extraordinarily
fortunate in finding you."

He rang a gong upon the table, and the footman entered.

"Ask Lady Rossiter to have the goodness to step this way," said his
lordship, and a few moments later the lady was ushered into the room.
She was a small, middle-aged woman, very like Lord Linchmere in
appearance, with the same quick, alert features and grey-black hair.
The expression of anxiety, however, which I had observed upon his face
was very much more marked upon hers.  Some great grief seemed to have
cast its shadow over her features.  As Lord Linchmere presented me she
turned her face full upon me, and I was shocked to observe a
half-healed scar extending for two inches over her right eyebrow.  It
was partly concealed by plaster, but none the less I could see that it
had been a serious wound and not long inflicted.

"Dr. Hamilton is the very man for our purpose, Evelyn," said Lord
Linchmere.  "He is actually a collector of beetles, and he has written
articles upon the subject."

"Really!" said Lady Rossiter.  "Then you must have heard of my husband.
Everyone who knows anything about beetles must have heard of Sir Thomas
Rossiter."

For the first time a thin little ray of light began to break into the
obscure business.  Here, at last, was a connection between these people
and beetles.  Sir Thomas Rossiter--he was the greatest authority upon
the subject in the world.  He had made it his lifelong study, and had
written a most exhaustive work upon it.  I hastened to assure her that
I had read and appreciated it.

"Have you met my husband?" she asked.

"No, I have not."

"But you shall," said Lord Linchmere, with decision.

The lady was standing beside the desk, and she put her hand upon his
shoulder.  It was obvious to me as I saw their faces together that they
were brother and sister.

"Are you really prepared for this, Charles?  It is noble of you, but
you fill me with fears."  Her voice quavered with apprehension, and he
appeared to me to be equally moved, though he was making strong efforts
to conceal his agitation.

"Yes, yes, dear; it is all settled, it is all decided; in fact, there
is no other possible way, that I can see."

"There is one obvious way."

"No, no, Evelyn, I shall never abandon you--never.  It will come
right--depend upon it; it will come right, and surely it looks like the
interference of Providence that so perfect an instrument should be put
into our hands."

My position was embarrassing, for I felt that for the instant they had
forgotten my presence.  But Lord Linchmere came back suddenly to me and
to my engagement.

"The business for which I want you, Dr. Hamilton, is that you should
put yourself absolutely at my disposal.  I wish you to come for a short
journey with me, to remain always at my side, and to promise to do
without question whatever I may ask you, however unreasonable it may
appear to you to be."

"That is a good deal to ask," said I.

"Unfortunately I cannot put it more plainly, for I do not myself know
what turn matters may take.  You may be sure, however, that you will
not be asked to do anything which your conscience does not approve; and
I promise you that, when all is over, you will be proud to have been
concerned in so good a work."

"If it ends happily," said the lady.

"Exactly; if it ends happily," his lordship repeated.

"And terms?" I asked.

"Twenty pounds a day."

I was amazed at the sum, and must have showed my surprise upon my
features.

"It is a rare combination of qualities, as must have struck you when
you first read the advertisement," said Lord Linchmere; "such varied
gifts may well command a high return, and I do not conceal from you
that your duties might be arduous or even dangerous. Besides, it is
possible that one or two days may bring the matter to an end."

"Please God!" sighed his sister.

"So now, Dr. Hamilton, may I rely upon your aid?"

"Most undoubtedly," said I.  "You have only to tell me what my duties
are."

"Your first duty will be to return to your home.  You will pack up
whatever you may need for a short visit to the country.  We start
together from Paddington Station at 3:40 this afternoon."

"Do we go far?"

"As far as Pangbourne.  Meet me at the bookstall at 3:30.  I shall have
the tickets.  Goodbye, Dr. Hamilton!  And, by the way, there are two
things which I should be very glad if you would bring with you, in case
you have them.  One is your case for collecting beetles, and the other
is a stick, and the thicker and heavier the better."


You may imagine that I had plenty to think of from the time that I left
Brook Street until I set out to meet Lord Linchmere at Paddington.  The
whole fantastic business kept arranging and rearranging itself in
kaleidoscopic forms inside my brain, until I had thought out a dozen
explanations, each of them more grotesquely improbable than the last.
And yet I felt that the truth must be something grotesquely improbable
also.  At last I gave up all attempts at finding a solution, and
contented myself with exactly carrying out the instructions which I had
received.  With a hand valise, specimen-case, and a loaded cane, I was
waiting at the Paddington bookstall when Lord Linchmere arrived.  He
was an even smaller man than I had thought--frail and peaky, with a
manner which was more nervous than it had been in the morning.  He wore
a long, thick travelling ulster, and I observed that he carried a heavy
blackthorn cudgel in his hand.

"I have the tickets," said he, leading the way up the platform.

"This is our train.  I have engaged a carriage, for I am particularly
anxious to impress one or two things upon you while we travel down."

And yet all that he had to impress upon me might have been said in a
sentence, for it was that I was to remember that I was there as a
protection to himself, and that I was not on any consideration to leave
him for an instant.  This he repeated again and again as our journey
drew to a close, with an insistence which showed that his nerves were
thoroughly shaken.

"Yes," he said at last, in answer to my looks rather than to my words,
"I AM nervous, Dr. Hamilton.  I have always been a timid man, and my
timidity depends upon my frail physical health.  But my soul is firm,
and I can bring myself up to face a danger which a less-nervous man
might shrink from.  What I am doing now is done from no compulsion, but
entirely from a sense of duty, and yet it is, beyond doubt, a desperate
risk.  If things should go wrong, I will have some claims to the title
of martyr."

This eternal reading of riddles was too much for me.  I felt that I
must put a term to it.

"I think it would very much better, sir, if you were to trust me
entirely," said I.  "It is impossible for me to act effectively, when I
do not know what are the objects which we have in view, or even where
we are going."

"Oh, as to where we are going, there need be no mystery about that,"
said he; "we are going to Delamere Court, the residence of Sir Thomas
Rossiter, with whose work you are so conversant.  As to the exact
object of our visit, I do not know that at this stage of the
proceedings anything would be gained, Dr. Hamilton, by taking you into
my complete confidence.  I may tell you that we are acting--I say 'we,'
because my sister, Lady Rossiter, takes the same view as myself--with
the one object of preventing anything in the nature of a family
scandal.  That being so, you can understand that I am loath to give any
explanations which are not absolutely necessary.  It would be a
different matter, Dr. Hamilton, if I were asking your advice.  As
matters stand, it is only your active help which I need, and I will
indicate to you from time to time how you can best give it."

There was nothing more to be said, and a poor man can put up with a
good deal for twenty pounds a day, but I felt none the less that Lord
Linchmere was acting rather scurvily towards me.  He wished to convert
me into a passive tool, like the blackthorn in his hand.  With his
sensitive disposition I could imagine, however, that scandal would be
abhorrent to him, and I realized that he would not take me into his
confidence until no other course was open to him.  I must trust to my
own eyes and ears to solve the mystery, but I had every confidence that
I should not trust to them in vain.

Delamere Court lies a good five miles from Pangbourne Station, and we
drove for that distance in an open fly.  Lord Linchmere sat in deep
thought during the time, and he never opened his mouth until we were
close to our destination.  When he did speak it was to give me a piece
of information which surprised me.

"Perhaps you are not aware," said he, "that I am a medical man like
yourself?"

"No, sir, I did not know it."

"Yes, I qualified in my younger days, when there were several lives
between me and the peerage.  I have not had occasion to practise, but I
have found it a useful education, all the same.  I never regretted the
years which I devoted to medical study.  These are the gates of
Delamere Court."

We had come to two high pillars crowned with heraldic monsters which
flanked the opening of a winding avenue.  Over the laurel bushes and
rhododendrons, I could see a long, many-gabled mansion, girdled with
ivy, and toned to the warm, cheery, mellow glow of old brick-work.  My
eyes were still fixed in admiration upon this delightful house when my
companion plucked nervously at my sleeve.

"Here's Sir Thomas," he whispered.  "Please talk beetle all you can."

A tall, thin figure, curiously angular and bony, had emerged through a
gap in the hedge of laurels.  In his hand he held a spud, and he wore
gauntleted gardener's gloves.  A broad-brimmed, grey hat cast his face
into shadow, but it struck me as exceedingly austere, with an
ill-nourished beard and harsh, irregular features. The fly pulled up
and Lord Linchmere sprang out.

"My dear Thomas, how are you?" said he, heartily.

But the heartiness was by no means reciprocal.  The owner of the
grounds glared at me over his brother-in-law's shoulder, and I caught
broken scraps of sentences--"well-known wishes ... hatred of
strangers ... unjustifiable intrusion ... perfectly inexcusable."
Then there was a muttered explanation, and the two of them came over
together to the side of the fly.

"Let me present you to Sir Thomas Rossiter, Dr. Hamilton," said Lord
Linchmere.  "You will find that you have a strong community of tastes."

I bowed.  Sir Thomas stood very stiffly, looking at me severely from
under the broad brim of his hat.

"Lord Linchmere tells me that you know something about beetles," said
he.  "What do you know about beetles?"

"I know what I have learned from your work upon the coleoptera, Sir
Thomas," I answered.

"Give me the names of the better-known species of the British
scarabaei," said he.

I had not expected an examination, but fortunately I was ready for one.
My answers seemed to please him, for his stern features relaxed.

"You appear to have read my book with some profit, sir," said he.  "It
is a rare thing for me to meet anyone who takes an intelligent interest
in such matters.  People can find time for such trivialities as sport
or society, and yet the beetles are overlooked.  I can assure you that
the greater part of the idiots in this part of the country are unaware
that I have ever written a book at all--I, the first man who ever
described the true function of the elytra.  I am glad to see you, sir,
and I have no doubt that I can show you some specimens which will
interest you."  He stepped into the fly and drove up with us to the
house, expounding to me as we went some recent researches which he had
made into the anatomy of the lady-bird.

I have said that Sir Thomas Rossiter wore a large hat drawn down over
his brows.  As he entered the hall he uncovered himself, and I was at
once aware of a singular characteristic which the hat had concealed.
His forehead, which was naturally high, and higher still on account of
receding hair, was in a continual state of movement.  Some nervous
weakness kept the muscles in a constant spasm, which sometimes produced
a mere twitching and sometimes a curious rotary movement unlike
anything which I had ever seen before.  It was strikingly visible as he
turned towards us after entering the study, and seemed the more
singular from the contrast with the hard, steady, grey eyes which
looked out from underneath those palpitating brows.

"I am sorry," said he, "that Lady Rossiter is not here to help me to
welcome you.  By the way, Charles, did Evelyn say anything about the
date of her return?"

"She wished to stay in town for a few more days," said Lord Linchmere.
"You know how ladies' social duties accumulate if they have been for
some time in the country.  My sister has many old friends in London at
present."

"Well, she is her own mistress, and I should not wish to alter her
plans, but I shall be glad when I see her again.  It is very lonely
here without her company."

"I was afraid that you might find it so, and that was partly why I ran
down.  My young friend, Dr. Hamilton, is so much interested in the
subject which you have made your own, that I thought you would not mind
his accompanying me."

"I lead a retired life, Dr. Hamilton, and my aversion to strangers
grows upon me," said our host.  "I have sometimes thought that my
nerves are not so good as they were.  My travels in search of beetles
in my younger days took me into many malarious and unhealthy places.
But a brother coleopterist like yourself is always a welcome guest, and
I shall be delighted if you will look over my collection, which I think
that I may without exaggeration describe as the best in Europe."

And so no doubt it was.  He had a huge, oaken cabinet arranged in
shallow drawers, and here, neatly ticketed and classified, were beetles
from every corner of the earth, black, brown, blue, green, and mottled.
Every now and then as he swept his hand over the lines and lines of
impaled insects he would catch up some rare specimen, and, handling it
with as much delicacy and reverence as if it were a precious relic, he
would hold forth upon its peculiarities and the circumstances under
which it came into his possession.  It was evidently an unusual thing
for him to meet with a sympathetic listener, and he talked and talked
until the spring evening had deepened into night, and the gong
announced that it was time to dress for dinner.  All the time Lord
Linchmere said nothing, but he stood at his brother-in-law's elbow, and
I caught him continually shooting curious little, questioning glances
into his face.  And his own features expressed some strong emotion,
apprehension, sympathy, expectation:  I seemed to read them all. I was
sure that Lord Linchmere was fearing something and awaiting something,
but what that something might be I could not imagine.

The evening passed quietly but pleasantly, and I should have been
entirely at my ease if it had not been for that continual sense of
tension upon the part of Lord Linchmere.  As to our host, I found that
he improved upon acquaintance.  He spoke constantly with affection of
his absent wife, and also of his little son, who had recently been sent
to school.  The house, he said, was not the same without them.  If it
were not for his scientific studies, he did not know how he could get
through the days.  After dinner we smoked for some time in the
billiard-room, and finally went early to bed.

And then it was that, for the first time, the suspicion that Lord
Linchmere was a lunatic crossed my mind.  He followed me into my
bedroom, when our host had retired.

"Doctor," said he, speaking in a low, hurried voice, "you must come
with me.  You must spend the night in my bedroom."

"What do you mean?"

"I prefer not to explain.  But this is part of your duties.  My room is
close by, and you can return to your own before the servant calls you
in the morning."

"But why?" I asked.

"Because I am nervous of being alone," said he.  "That's the reason,
since you must have a reason."

It seemed rank lunacy, but the argument of those twenty pounds would
overcome many objections.  I followed him to his room.

"Well," said I, "there's only room for one in that bed."

"Only one shall occupy it," said he.

"And the other?"

"Must remain on watch."

"Why?" said I.  "One would think you expected to be attacked."

"Perhaps I do."

"In that case, why not lock your door?"

"Perhaps I WANT to be attacked."

It looked more and more like lunacy.  However, there was nothing for it
but to submit.  I shrugged my shoulders and sat down in the arm-chair
beside the empty fireplace.

"I am to remain on watch, then?" said I, ruefully.

"We will divide the night.  If you will watch until two, I will watch
the remainder."

"Very good."

"Call me at two o'clock, then."

"I will do so."

"Keep your ears open, and if you hear any sounds wake me
instantly--instantly, you hear?"

"You can rely upon it."  I tried to look as solemn as he did.

"And for God's sake don't go to sleep," said he, and so, taking off
only his coat, he threw the coverlet over him and settled down for the
night.

It was a melancholy vigil, and made more so by my own sense of its
folly.  Supposing that by any chance Lord Linchmere had cause to
suspect that he was subject to danger in the house of Sir Thomas
Rossiter, why on earth could he not lock his door and so protect
himself?  His own answer that he might wish to be attacked was absurd.
Why should he possibly wish to be attacked?  And who would wish to
attack him?  Clearly, Lord Linchmere was suffering from some singular
delusion, and the result was that on an imbecile pretext I was to be
deprived of my night's rest.  Still, however absurd, I was determined
to carry out his injunctions to the letter as long as I was in his
employment.  I sat, therefore, beside the empty fireplace, and listened
to a sonorous chiming clock somewhere down the passage which gurgled
and struck every quarter of an hour. It was an endless vigil.  Save for
that single clock, an absolute silence reigned throughout the great
house.  A small lamp stood on the table at my elbow, throwing a circle
of light round my chair, but leaving the corners of the room draped in
shadow.  On the bed Lord Linchmere was breathing peacefully.  I envied
him his quiet sleep, and again and again my own eyelids drooped, but
every time my sense of duty came to my help, and I sat up, rubbing my
eyes and pinching myself with a determination to see my irrational
watch to an end.

And I did so.  From down the passage came the chimes of two o'clock,
and I laid my hand upon the shoulder of the sleeper. Instantly he was
sitting up, with an expression of the keenest interest upon his face.

"You have heard something?"

"No, sir.  It is two o'clock."

"Very good.  I will watch.  You can go to sleep."

I lay down under the coverlet as he had done and was soon unconscious.
My last recollection was of that circle of lamplight, and of the small,
hunched-up figure and strained, anxious face of Lord Linchmere in the
centre of it.

How long I slept I do not know; but I was suddenly aroused by a sharp
tug at my sleeve.  The room was in darkness, but a hot smell of oil
told me that the lamp had only that instant been extinguished.

"Quick!  Quick!" said Lord Linchmere's voice in my ear.

I sprang out of bed, he still dragging at my arm.

"Over here!" he whispered, and pulled me into a corner of the room.
"Hush!  Listen!"

In the silence of the night I could distinctly hear that someone was
coming down the corridor.  It was a stealthy step, faint and
intermittent, as of a man who paused cautiously after every stride.
Sometimes for half a minute there was no sound, and then came the
shuffle and creak which told of a fresh advance.  My companion was
trembling with excitement.  His hand, which still held my sleeve,
twitched like a branch in the wind.

"What is it?" I whispered.

"It's he!"

"Sir Thomas?"

"Yes."

"What does he want?"

"Hush!  Do nothing until I tell you."

I was conscious now that someone was trying the door.  There was the
faintest little rattle from the handle, and then I dimly saw a thin
slit of subdued light.  There was a lamp burning somewhere far down the
passage, and it just sufficed to make the outside visible from the
darkness of our room.  The greyish slit grew broader and broader, very
gradually, very gently, and then outlined against it I saw the dark
figure of a man.  He was squat and crouching, with the silhouette of a
bulky and misshapen dwarf. Slowly the door swung open with this ominous
shape framed in the centre of it.  And then, in an instant, the
crouching figure shot up, there was a tiger spring across the room and
thud, thud, thud, came three tremendous blows from some heavy object
upon the bed.

I was so paralysed with amazement that I stood motionless and staring
until I was aroused by a yell for help from my companion. The open door
shed enough light for me to see the outline of things, and there was
little Lord Linchmere with his arms round the neck of his
brother-in-law, holding bravely on to him like a game bull-terrier with
its teeth into a gaunt deerhound.  The tall, bony man dashed himself
about, writhing round and round to get a grip upon his assailant; but
the other, clutching on from behind, still kept his hold, though his
shrill, frightened cries showed how unequal he felt the contest to be.
I sprang to the rescue, and the two of us managed to throw Sir Thomas
to the ground, though he made his teeth meet in my shoulder.  With all
my youth and weight and strength, it was a desperate struggle before we
could master his frenzied struggles; but at last we secured his arms
with the waist-cord of the dressing-gown which he was wearing.  I was
holding his legs while Lord Linchmere was endeavouring to relight the
lamp, when there came the pattering of many feet in the passage, and
the butler and two footmen, who had been alarmed by the cries, rushed
into the room.  With their aid we had no further difficulty in securing
our prisoner, who lay foaming and glaring upon the ground. One glance
at his face was enough to prove that he was a dangerous maniac, while
the short, heavy hammer which lay beside the bed showed how murderous
had been his intentions.

"Do not use any violence!" said Lord Linchmere, as we raised the
struggling man to his feet.  "He will have a period of stupor after
this excitement.  I believe that it is coming on already." As he spoke
the convulsions became less violent, and the madman's head fell forward
upon his breast, as if he were overcome by sleep.  We led him down the
passage and stretched him upon his own bed, where he lay unconscious,
breathing heavily.

"Two of you will watch him," said Lord Linchmere.  "And now, Dr.
Hamilton, if you will return with me to my room, I will give you the
explanation which my horror of scandal has perhaps caused me to delay
too long.  Come what may, you will never have cause to regret your
share in this night's work.

"The case may be made clear in a very few words," he continued, when we
were alone.  "My poor brother-in-law is one of the best fellows upon
earth, a loving husband and an estimable father, but he comes from a
stock which is deeply tainted with insanity.  He has more than once had
homicidal outbreaks, which are the more painful because his inclination
is always to attack the very person to whom he is most attached.  His
son was sent away to school to avoid this danger, and then came an
attempt upon my sister, his wife, from which she escaped with injuries
that you may have observed when you met her in London.  You understand
that he knows nothing of the matter when he is in his sound senses, and
would ridicule the suggestion that he could under any circumstances
injure those whom he loves so dearly.  It is often, as you know, a
characteristic of such maladies that it is absolutely impossible to
convince the man who suffers from them of their existence.

"Our great object was, of course, to get him under restraint before he
could stain his hands with blood, but the matter was full of
difficulty.  He is a recluse in his habits, and would not see any
medical man.  Besides, it was necessary for our purpose that the
medical man should convince himself of his insanity; and he is sane as
you or I, save on these very rare occasions.  But, fortunately, before
he has these attacks he always shows certain premonitory symptoms,
which are providential danger-signals, warning us to be upon our guard.
The chief of these is that nervous contortion of the forehead which you
must have observed. This is a phenomenon which always appears from
three to four days before his attacks of frenzy.  The moment it showed
itself his wife came into town on some pretext, and took refuge in my
house in Brook Street.

"It remained for me to convince a medical man of Sir Thomas's insanity,
without which it was impossible to put him where he could do no harm.
The first problem was how to get a medical man into his house.  I
bethought me of his interest in beetles, and his love for anyone who
shared his tastes.  I advertised, therefore, and was fortunate enough
to find in you the very man I wanted.  A stout companion was necessary,
for I knew that the lunacy could only be proved by a murderous assault,
and I had every reason to believe that that assault would be made upon
myself, since he had the warmest regard for me in his moments of
sanity.  I think your intelligence will supply all the rest.  I did not
know that the attack would come by night, but I thought it very
probable, for the crises of such cases usually do occur in the early
hours of the morning.  I am a very nervous man myself, but I saw no
other way in which I could remove this terrible danger from my sister's
life. I need not ask you whether you are willing to sign the lunacy
papers."

"Undoubtedly.  But TWO signatures are necessary."

"You forget that I am myself a holder of a medical degree.  I have the
papers on a side-table here, so if you will be good enough to sign them
now, we can have the patient removed in the morning."


So that was my visit to Sir Thomas Rossiter, the famous beetle-hunter,
and that was also my first step upon the ladder of success, for Lady
Rossiter and Lord Linchmere have proved to be staunch friends, and they
have never forgotten my association with them in the time of their
need.  Sir Thomas is out and said to be cured, but I still think that
if I spent another night at Delamere Court, I should be inclined to
lock my door upon the inside.



The Man with the Watches

There are many who will still bear in mind the singular circumstances
which, under the heading of the Rugby Mystery, filled many columns of
the daily Press in the spring of the year 1892.  Coming as it did at a
period of exceptional dullness, it attracted perhaps rather more
attention than it deserved, but it offered to the public that mixture
of the whimsical and the tragic which is most stimulating to the
popular imagination. Interest drooped, however, when, after weeks of
fruitless investigation, it was found that no final explanation of the
facts was forthcoming, and the tragedy seemed from that time to the
present to have finally taken its place in the dark catalogue of
inexplicable and unexpiated crimes.  A recent communication (the
authenticity of which appears to be above question) has, however,
thrown some new and clear light upon the matter.  Before laying it
before the public it would be as well, perhaps, that I should refresh
their memories as to the singular facts upon which this commentary is
founded.  These facts were briefly as follows:

At five o'clock on the evening of the 18th of March in the year already
mentioned a train left Euston Station for Manchester.  It was a rainy,
squally day, which grew wilder as it progressed, so it was by no means
the weather in which anyone would travel who was not driven to do so by
necessity.  The train, however, is a favourite one among Manchester
business men who are returning from town, for it does the journey in
four hours and twenty minutes, with only three stoppages upon the way.
In spite of the inclement evening it was, therefore, fairly well filled
upon the occasion of which I speak.  The guard of the train was a tried
servant of the company--a man who had worked for twenty-two years
without a blemish or complaint.  His name was John Palmer.

The station clock was upon the stroke of five, and the guard was about
to give the customary signal to the engine-driver when he observed two
belated passengers hurrying down the platform.  The one was an
exceptionally tall man, dressed in a long black overcoat with astrakhan
collar and cuffs.  I have already said that the evening was an
inclement one, and the tall traveller had the high, warm collar turned
up to protect his throat against the bitter March wind.  He appeared,
as far as the guard could judge by so hurried an inspection, to be a
man between fifty and sixty years of age, who had retained a good deal
of the vigour and activity of his youth.  In one hand he carried a
brown leather Gladstone bag.  His companion was a lady, tall and erect,
walking with a vigorous step which outpaced the gentleman beside her.
She wore a long, fawn-coloured dust-cloak, a black, close-fitting
toque, and a dark veil which concealed the greater part of her face.
The two might very well have passed as father and daughter.  They
walked swiftly down the line of carriages, glancing in at the windows,
until the guard, John Palmer, overtook them.

"Now then, sir, look sharp, the train is going," said he.

"First-class," the man answered.

The guard turned the handle of the nearest door.  In the carriage which
he had opened, there sat a small man with a cigar in his mouth.  His
appearance seems to have impressed itself upon the guard's memory, for
he was prepared, afterwards, to describe or to identify him.  He was a
man of thirty-four or thirty-five years of age, dressed in some grey
material, sharp-nosed, alert, with a ruddy, weather-beaten face, and a
small, closely cropped, black beard.  He glanced up as the door was
opened.  The tall man paused with his foot upon the step.

"This is a smoking compartment.  The lady dislikes smoke," said he,
looking round at the guard.

"All right!  Here you are, sir!" said John Palmer.  He slammed the door
of the smoking carriage, opened that of the next one, which was empty,
and thrust the two travellers in.  At the same moment he sounded his
whistle and the wheels of the train began to move.  The man with the
cigar was at the window of his carriage, and said something to the
guard as he rolled past him, but the words were lost in the bustle of
the departure.  Palmer stepped into the guard's van, as it came up to
him, and thought no more of the incident.

Twelve minutes after its departure the train reached Willesden
Junction, where it stopped for a very short interval.  An examination
of the tickets has made it certain that no one either joined or left it
at this time, and no passenger was seen to alight upon the platform.
At 5:14 the journey to Manchester was resumed, and Rugby was reached at
6:50, the express being five minutes late.

At Rugby the attention of the station officials was drawn to the fact
that the door of one of the first-class carriages was open.  An
examination of that compartment, and of its neighbour, disclosed a
remarkable state of affairs.

The smoking carriage in which the short, red-faced man with the black
beard had been seen was now empty.  Save for a half-smoked cigar, there
was no trace whatever of its recent occupant.  The door of this
carriage was fastened.  In the next compartment, to which attention had
been originally drawn, there was no sign either of the gentleman with
the astrakhan collar or of the young lady who accompanied him.  All
three passengers had disappeared.  On the other hand, there was found
upon the floor of this carriage--the one in which the tall traveller
and the lady had been--a young man fashionably dressed and of elegant
appearance.  He lay with his knees drawn up, and his head resting
against the farther door, an elbow upon either seat.  A bullet had
penetrated his heart and his death must have been instantaneous.  No
one had seen such a man enter the train, and no railway ticket was
found in his pocket, neither were there any markings upon his linen,
nor papers nor personal property which might help to identify him.  Who
he was, whence he had come, and how he had met his end were each as
great a mystery as what had occurred to the three people who had
started an hour and a half before from Willesden in those two
compartments.

I have said that there was no personal property which might help to
identify him, but it is true that there was one peculiarity about this
unknown young man which was much commented upon at the time.  In his
pockets were found no fewer than six valuable gold watches, three in
the various pockets of his waist-coat, one in his ticket-pocket, one in
his breast-pocket, and one small one set in a leather strap and
fastened round his left wrist.  The obvious explanation that the man
was a pickpocket, and that this was his plunder, was discounted by the
fact that all six were of American make and of a type which is rare in
England.  Three of them bore the mark of the Rochester Watchmaking
Company; one was by Mason, of Elmira; one was unmarked; and the small
one, which was highly jewelled and ornamented, was from Tiffany, of New
York.  The other contents of his pocket consisted of an ivory knife
with a corkscrew by Rodgers, of Sheffield; a small, circular mirror,
one inch in diameter; a readmission slip to the Lyceum Theatre; a
silver box full of vesta matches, and a brown leather cigar-case
containing two cheroots--also two pounds fourteen shillings in money.
It was clear, then, that whatever motives may have led to his death,
robbery was not among them.  As already mentioned, there were no
markings upon the man's linen, which appeared to be new, and no
tailor's name upon his coat.  In appearance he was young, short,
smooth-cheeked, and delicately featured.  One of his front teeth was
conspicuously stopped with gold.

On the discovery of the tragedy an examination was instantly made of
the tickets of all passengers, and the number of the passengers
themselves was counted.  It was found that only three tickets were
unaccounted for, corresponding to the three travellers who were
missing.  The express was then allowed to proceed, but a new guard was
sent with it, and John Palmer was detained as a witness at Rugby.  The
carriage which included the two compartments in question was uncoupled
and side-tracked.  Then, on the arrival of Inspector Vane, of Scotland
Yard, and of Mr. Henderson, a detective in the service of the railway
company, an exhaustive inquiry was made into all the circumstances.

That crime had been committed was certain.  The bullet, which appeared
to have come from a small pistol or revolver, had been fired from some
little distance, as there was no scorching of the clothes.  No weapon
was found in the compartment (which finally disposed of the theory of
suicide), nor was there any sign of the brown leather bag which the
guard had seen in the hand of the tall gentleman.  A lady's parasol was
found upon the rack, but no other trace was to be seen of the
travellers in either of the sections. Apart from the crime, the
question of how or why three passengers (one of them a lady) could get
out of the train, and one other get in during the unbroken run between
Willesden and Rugby, was one which excited the utmost curiosity among
the general public, and gave rise to much speculation in the London
Press.

John Palmer, the guard was able at the inquest to give some evidence
which threw a little light upon the matter.  There was a spot between
Tring and Cheddington, according to his statement, where, on account of
some repairs to the line, the train had for a few minutes slowed down
to a pace not exceeding eight or ten miles an hour.  At that place it
might be possible for a man, or even for an exceptionally active woman,
to have left the train without serious injury.  It was true that a gang
of platelayers was there, and that they had seen nothing, but it was
their custom to stand in the middle between the metals, and the open
carriage door was upon the far side, so that it was conceivable that
someone might have alighted unseen, as the darkness would by that time
be drawing in. A steep embankment would instantly screen anyone who
sprang out from the observation of the navvies.

The guard also deposed that there was a good deal of movement upon the
platform at Willesden Junction, and that though it was certain that no
one had either joined or left the train there, it was still quite
possible that some of the passengers might have changed unseen from one
compartment to another.  It was by no means uncommon for a gentleman to
finish his cigar in a smoking carriage and then to change to a clearer
atmosphere.  Supposing that the man with the black beard had done so at
Willesden (and the half-smoked cigar upon the floor seemed to favour
the supposition), he would naturally go into the nearest section, which
would bring him into the company of the two other actors in this drama.
Thus the first stage of the affair might be surmised without any great
breach of probability.  But what the second stage had been, or how the
final one had been arrived at, neither the guard nor the experienced
detective officers could suggest.

A careful examination of the line between Willesden and Rugby resulted
in one discovery which might or might not have a bearing upon the
tragedy.  Near Tring, at the very place where the train slowed down,
there was found at the bottom of the embankment a small pocket
Testament, very shabby and worn.  It was printed by the Bible Society
of London, and bore an inscription:  "From John to Alice.  Jan. 13th,
1856," upon the fly-leaf.  Underneath was written:  "James.  July 4th,
1859," and beneath that again: "Edward.  Nov. 1st, 1869," all the
entries being in the same handwriting.  This was the only clue, if it
could be called a clue, which the police obtained, and the coroner's
verdict of "Murder by a person or persons unknown" was the
unsatisfactory ending of a singular case.  Advertisement, rewards, and
inquiries proved equally fruitless, and nothing could be found which
was solid enough to form the basis for a profitable investigation.

It would be a mistake, however, to suppose that no theories were formed
to account for the facts.  On the contrary, the Press, both in England
and in America, teemed with suggestions and suppositions, most of which
were obviously absurd.  The fact that the watches were of American
make, and some peculiarities in connection with the gold stopping of
his front tooth, appeared to indicate that the deceased was a citizen
of the United States, though his linen, clothes and boots were
undoubtedly of British manufacture.  It was surmised, by some, that he
was concealed under the seat, and that, being discovered, he was for
some reason, possibly because he had overheard their guilty secrets,
put to death by his fellow-passengers.  When coupled with generalities
as to the ferocity and cunning of anarchical and other secret
societies, this theory sounded as plausible as any.

The fact that he should be without a ticket would be consistent with
the idea of concealment, and it was well known that women played a
prominent part in the Nihilistic propaganda.  On the other hand, it was
clear, from the guard's statement, that the man must have been hidden
there BEFORE the others arrived, and how unlikely the coincidence that
conspirators should stray exactly into the very compartment in which a
spy was already concealed! Besides, this explanation ignored the man in
the smoking carriage, and gave no reason at all for his simultaneous
disappearance.  The police had little difficulty in showing that such a
theory would not cover the facts, but they were unprepared in the
absence of evidence to advance any alternative explanation.

There was a letter in the Daily Gazette, over the signature of a
well-known criminal investigator, which gave rise to considerable
discussion at the time.  He had formed a hypothesis which had at least
ingenuity to recommend it, and I cannot do better than append it in his
own words.

"Whatever may be the truth," said he, "it must depend upon some bizarre
and rare combination of events, so we need have no hesitation in
postulating such events in our explanation.  In the absence of data we
must abandon the analytic or scientific method of investigation, and
must approach it in the synthetic fashion. In a word, instead of taking
known events and deducing from them what has occurred, we must build up
a fanciful explanation if it will only be consistent with known events.
We can then test this explanation by any fresh facts which may arise.
If they all fit into their places, the probability is that we are upon
the right track, and with each fresh fact this probability increases in
a geometrical progression until the evidence becomes final and
convincing.

"Now, there is one most remarkable and suggestive fact which has not
met with the attention which it deserves.  There is a local train
running through Harrow and King's Langley, which is timed in such a way
that the express must have overtaken it at or about the period when it
eased down its speed to eight miles an hour on account of the repairs
of the line.  The two trains would at that time be travelling in the
same direction at a similar rate of speed and upon parallel lines.  It
is within every one's experience how, under such circumstances, the
occupant of each carriage can see very plainly the passengers in the
other carriages opposite to him. The lamps of the express had been lit
at Willesden, so that each compartment was brightly illuminated, and
most visible to an observer from outside.

"Now, the sequence of events as I reconstruct them would be after this
fashion.  This young man with the abnormal number of watches was alone
in the carriage of the slow train.  His ticket, with his papers and
gloves and other things, was, we will suppose, on the seat beside him.
He was probably an American, and also probably a man of weak intellect.
The excessive wearing of jewellery is an early symptom in some forms of
mania.

"As he sat watching the carriages of the express which were (on account
of the state of the line) going at the same pace as himself, he
suddenly saw some people in it whom he knew.  We will suppose for the
sake of our theory that these people were a woman whom he loved and a
man whom he hated--and who in return hated him.  The young man was
excitable and impulsive.  He opened the door of his carriage, stepped
from the footboard of the local train to the footboard of the express,
opened the other door, and made his way into the presence of these two
people.  The feat (on the supposition that the trains were going at the
same pace) is by no means so perilous as it might appear.

"Having now got our young man, without his ticket, into the carriage in
which the elder man and the young woman are travelling, it is not
difficult to imagine that a violent scene ensued.  It is possible that
the pair were also Americans, which is the more probable as the man
carried a weapon--an unusual thing in England. If our supposition of
incipient mania is correct, the young man is likely to have assaulted
the other.  As the upshot of the quarrel the elder man shot the
intruder, and then made his escape from the carriage, taking the young
lady with him.  We will suppose that all this happened very rapidly,
and that the train was still going at so slow a pace that it was not
difficult for them to leave it.  A woman might leave a train going at
eight miles an hour.  As a matter of fact, we know that this woman DID
do so.

"And now we have to fit in the man in the smoking carriage. Presuming
that we have, up to this point, reconstructed the tragedy correctly, we
shall find nothing in this other man to cause us to reconsider our
conclusions.  According to my theory, this man saw the young fellow
cross from one train to the other, saw him open the door, heard the
pistol-shot, saw the two fugitives spring out on to the line, realized
that murder had been done, and sprang out himself in pursuit.  Why he
has never been heard of since--whether he met his own death in the
pursuit, or whether, as is more likely, he was made to realize that it
was not a case for his interference--is a detail which we have at
present no means of explaining.  I acknowledge that there are some
difficulties in the way.  At first sight, it might seem improbable that
at such a moment a murderer would burden himself in his flight with a
brown leather bag.  My answer is that he was well aware that if the bag
were found his identity would be established.  It was absolutely
necessary for him to take it with him.  My theory stands or falls upon
one point, and I call upon the railway company to make strict inquiry
as to whether a ticket was found unclaimed in the local train through
Harrow and King's Langley upon the 18th of March.  If such a ticket
were found my case is proved.  If not, my theory may still be the
correct one, for it is conceivable either that he travelled without a
ticket or that his ticket was lost."

To this elaborate and plausible hypothesis the answer of the police and
of the company was, first, that no such ticket was found; secondly,
that the slow train would never run parallel to the express; and,
thirdly, that the local train had been stationary in King's Langley
Station when the express, going at fifty miles an hour, had flashed
past it.  So perished the only satisfying explanation, and five years
have elapsed without supplying a new one.  Now, at last, there comes a
statement which covers all the facts, and which must be regarded as
authentic.  It took the shape of a letter dated from New York, and
addressed to the same criminal investigator whose theory I have quoted.
It is given here in extenso, with the exception of the two opening
paragraphs, which are personal in their nature:

"You'll excuse me if I'm not very free with names.  There's less reason
now than there was five years ago when mother was still living.  But
for all that, I had rather cover up our tracks all I can.  But I owe
you an explanation, for if your idea of it was wrong, it was a mighty
ingenious one all the same.  I'll have to go back a little so as you
may understand all about it.

"My people came from Bucks, England, and emigrated to the States in the
early fifties.  They settled in Rochester, in the State of New York,
where my father ran a large dry goods store. There were only two sons:
myself, James, and my brother, Edward. I was ten years older than my
brother, and after my father died I sort of took the place of a father
to him, as an elder brother would.  He was a bright, spirited boy, and
just one of the most beautiful creatures that ever lived.  But there
was always a soft spot in him, and it was like mould in cheese, for it
spread and spread, and nothing that you could do would stop it.  Mother
saw it just as clearly as I did, but she went on spoiling him all the
same, for he had such a way with him that you could refuse him nothing.
I did all I could to hold him in, and he hated me for my pains.

"At last he fairly got his head, and nothing that we could do would
stop him.  He got off into New York, and went rapidly from bad to
worse.  At first he was only fast, and then he was criminal; and then,
at the end of a year or two, he was one of the most notorious young
crooks in the city.  He had formed a friendship with Sparrow MacCoy,
who was at the head of his profession as a bunco-steerer, green
goodsman and general rascal. They took to card-sharping, and frequented
some of the best hotels in New York.  My brother was an excellent actor
(he might have made an honest name for himself if he had chosen), and
he would take the parts of a young Englishman of title, of a simple lad
from the West, or of a college undergraduate, whichever suited Sparrow
MacCoy's purpose.  And then one day he dressed himself as a girl, and
he carried it off so well, and made himself such a valuable decoy, that
it was their favourite game afterwards.  They had made it right with
Tammany and with the police, so it seemed as if nothing could ever stop
them, for those were in the days before the Lexow Commission, and if
you only had a pull, you could do pretty nearly everything you wanted.

"And nothing would have stopped them if they had only stuck to cards
and New York, but they must needs come up Rochester way, and forge a
name upon a cheque.  It was my brother that did it, though everyone
knew that it was under the influence of Sparrow MacCoy. I bought up
that cheque, and a pretty sum it cost me.  Then I went to my brother,
laid it before him on the table, and swore to him that I would
prosecute if he did not clear out of the country.  At first he simply
laughed.  I could not prosecute, he said, without breaking our mother's
heart, and he knew that I would not do that. I made him understand,
however, that our mother's heart was being broken in any case, and that
I had set firm on the point that I would rather see him in Rochester
gaol than in a New York hotel. So at last he gave in, and he made me a
solemn promise that he would see Sparrow MacCoy no more, that he would
go to Europe, and that he would turn his hand to any honest trade that
I helped him to get.  I took him down right away to an old family
friend, Joe Willson, who is an exporter of American watches and clocks,
and I got him to give Edward an agency in London, with a small salary
and a 15 per cent commission on all business.  His manner and
appearance were so good that he won the old man over at once, and
within a week he was sent off to London with a case full of samples.

"It seemed to me that this business of the cheque had really given my
brother a fright, and that there was some chance of his settling down
into an honest line of life.  My mother had spoken with him, and what
she said had touched him, for she had always been the best of mothers
to him and he had been the great sorrow of her life.  But I knew that
this man Sparrow MacCoy had a great influence over Edward and my chance
of keeping the lad straight lay in breaking the connection between
them.  I had a friend in the New York detective force, and through him
I kept a watch upon MacCoy. When, within a fortnight of my brother's
sailing, I heard that MacCoy had taken a berth in the Etruria, I was as
certain as if he had told me that he was going over to England for the
purpose of coaxing Edward back again into the ways that he had left.
In an instant I had resolved to go also, and to pit my influence
against MacCoy's.  I knew it was a losing fight, but I thought, and my
mother thought, that it was my duty.  We passed the last night together
in prayer for my success, and she gave me her own Testament that my
father had given her on the day of their marriage in the Old Country,
so that I might always wear it next my heart.

"I was a fellow-traveller, on the steamship, with Sparrow MacCoy, and
at least I had the satisfaction of spoiling his little game for the
voyage.  The very first night I went into the smoking-room, and found
him at the head of a card-table, with a half a dozen young fellows who
were carrying their full purses and their empty skulls over to Europe.
He was settling down for his harvest, and a rich one it would have
been.  But I soon changed all that.

"'Gentlemen,' said I, 'are you aware whom you are playing with?'

"'What's that to you?  You mind your own business!' said he, with an
oath.

"'Who is it, anyway?' asked one of the dudes.

"'He's Sparrow MacCoy, the most notorious card-sharper in the States.'

"Up he jumped with a bottle in his hand, but he remembered that he was
under the flag of the effete Old Country, where law and order run, and
Tammany has no pull.  Gaol and the gallows wait for violence and
murder, and there's no slipping out by the back door on board an ocean
liner.

"'Prove your words, you----!' said he.

"'I will!' said I.  'If you will turn up your right shirt-sleeve to the
shoulder, I will either prove my words or I will eat them.'

"He turned white and said not a word.  You see, I knew something of his
ways, and I was aware of that part of the mechanism which he and all
such sharpers use consists of an elastic down the arm with a clip just
above the wrist.  It is by means of this clip that they withdraw from
their hands the cards which they do not want, while they substitute
other cards from another hiding place.  I reckoned on it being there,
and it was.  He cursed me, slunk out of the saloon, and was hardly seen
again during the voyage.  For once, at any rate, I got level with
Mister Sparrow MacCoy.

"But he soon had his revenge upon me, for when it came to influencing
my brother he outweighed me every time.  Edward had kept himself
straight in London for the first few weeks, and had done some business
with his American watches, until this villain came across his path once
more.  I did my best, but the best was little enough.  The next thing I
heard there had been a scandal at one of the Northumberland Avenue
hotels: a traveller had been fleeced of a large sum by two confederate
card-sharpers, and the matter was in the hands of Scotland Yard.  The
first I learned of it was in the evening paper, and I was at once
certain that my brother and MacCoy were back at their old games.  I
hurried at once to Edward's lodgings.  They told me that he and a tall
gentleman (whom I recognized as MacCoy) had gone off together, and that
he had left the lodgings and taken his things with him.  The landlady
had heard them give several directions to the cabman, ending with
Euston Station, and she had accidentally overheard the tall gentleman
saying something about Manchester.  She believed that that was their
destination.

"A glance at the time-table showed me that the most likely train was at
five, though there was another at 4:35 which they might have caught.  I
had only time to get the later one, but found no sign of them either at
the depot or in the train.  They must have gone on by the earlier one,
so I determined to follow them to Manchester and search for them in the
hotels there. One last appeal to my brother by all that he owed to my
mother might even now be the salvation of him.  My nerves were
overstrung, and I lit a cigar to steady them.  At that moment, just as
the train was moving off, the door of my compartment was flung open,
and there were MacCoy and my brother on the platform.

"They were both disguised, and with good reason, for they knew that the
London police were after them.  MacCoy had a great astrakhan collar
drawn up, so that only his eyes and nose were showing.  My brother was
dressed like a woman, with a black veil half down his face, but of
course it did not deceive me for an instant, nor would it have done so
even if I had not known that he had often used such a dress before.  I
started up, and as I did so MacCoy recognized me.  He said something,
the conductor slammed the door, and they were shown into the next
compartment.  I tried to stop the train so as to follow them, but the
wheels were already moving, and it was too late.

"When we stopped at Willesden, I instantly changed my carriage. It
appears that I was not seen to do so, which is not surprising, as the
station was crowded with people.  MacCoy, of course, was expecting me,
and he had spent the time between Euston and Willesden in saying all he
could to harden my brother's heart and set him against me.  That is
what I fancy, for I had never found him so impossible to soften or to
move.  I tried this way and I tried that; I pictured his future in an
English gaol; I described the sorrow of his mother when I came back
with the news; I said everything to touch his heart, but all to no
purpose.  He sat there with a fixed sneer upon his handsome face, while
every now and then Sparrow MacCoy would throw in a taunt at me, or some
word of encouragement to hold my brother to his resolutions.

"'Why don't you run a Sunday-school?' he would say to me, and then, in
the same breath:  'He thinks you have no will of your own. He thinks
you are just the baby brother and that he can lead you where he likes.
He's only just finding out that you are a man as well as he.'

"It was those words of his which set me talking bitterly.  We had left
Willesden, you understand, for all this took some time. My temper got
the better of me, and for the first time in my life I let my brother
see the rough side of me.  Perhaps it would have been better had I done
so earlier and more often.

"'A man!' said I.  'Well, I'm glad to have your friend's assurance of
it, for no one would suspect it to see you like a boarding-school
missy.  I don't suppose in all this country there is a more
contemptible-looking creature than you are as you sit there with that
Dolly pinafore upon you.'  He coloured up at that, for he was a vain
man, and he winced from ridicule.

"'It's only a dust-cloak,' said he, and he slipped it off. 'One has to
throw the coppers off one's scent, and I had no other way to do it.'
He took his toque off with the veil attached, and he put both it and
the cloak into his brown bag.  'Anyway, I don't need to wear it until
the conductor comes round,' said he.

"'Nor then, either,' said I, and taking the bag I slung it with all my
force out of the window.  'Now,' said I, 'you'll never make a Mary Jane
of yourself while I can help it.  If nothing but that disguise stands
between you and a gaol, then to gaol you shall go.'

"That was the way to manage him.  I felt my advantage at once. His
supple nature was one which yielded to roughness far more readily than
to entreaty.  He flushed with shame, and his eyes filled with tears.
But MacCoy saw my advantage also, and was determined that I should not
pursue it.

"'He's my pard, and you shall not bully him,' he cried.

"'He's my brother, and you shall not ruin him,' said I.  'I believe a
spell of prison is the very best way of keeping you apart, and you
shall have it, or it will be no fault of mine.'

"'Oh, you would squeal, would you?' he cried, and in an instant he
whipped out his revolver.  I sprang for his hand, but saw that I was
too late, and jumped aside.  At the same instant he fired, and the
bullet which would have struck me passed through the heart of my
unfortunate brother.

"He dropped without a groan upon the floor of the compartment, and
MacCoy and I, equally horrified, knelt at each side of him, trying to
bring back some signs of life.  MacCoy still held the loaded revolver
in his hand, but his anger against me and my resentment towards him had
both for the moment been swallowed up in this sudden tragedy.  It was
he who first realized the situation. The train was for some reason
going very slowly at the moment, and he saw his opportunity for escape.
In an instant he had the door open, but I was as quick as he, and
jumping upon him the two of us fell off the footboard and rolled in
each other's arms down a steep embankment.  At the bottom I struck my
head against a stone, and I remembered nothing more.  When I came to
myself I was lying among some low bushes, not far from the railroad
track, and somebody was bathing my head with a wet handkerchief.  It
was Sparrow MacCoy.

"'I guess I couldn't leave you,' said he.  'I didn't want to have the
blood of two of you on my hands in one day.  You loved your brother,
I've no doubt; but you didn't love him a cent more than I loved him,
though you'll say that I took a queer way to show it.  Anyhow, it seems
a mighty empty world now that he is gone, and I don't care a
continental whether you give me over to the hangman or not.'

"He had turned his ankle in the fall, and there we sat, he with his
useless foot, and I with my throbbing head, and we talked and talked
until gradually my bitterness began to soften and to turn into
something like sympathy.  What was the use of revenging his death upon
a man who was as much stricken by that death as I was? And then, as my
wits gradually returned, I began to realize also that I could do
nothing against MacCoy which would not recoil upon my mother and
myself.  How could we convict him without a full account of my
brother's career being made public--the very thing which of all others
we wished to avoid?  It was really as much our interest as his to cover
the matter up, and from being an avenger of crime I found myself
changed to a conspirator against Justice. The place in which we found
ourselves was one of those pheasant preserves which are so common in
the Old Country, and as we groped our way through it I found myself
consulting the slayer of my brother as to how far it would be possible
to hush it up.

"I soon realized from what he said that unless there were some papers
of which we knew nothing in my brother's pockets, there was really no
possible means by which the police could identify him or learn how he
had got there.  His ticket was in MacCoy's pocket, and so was the
ticket for some baggage which they had left at the depot.  Like most
Americans, he had found it cheaper and easier to buy an outfit in
London than to bring one from New York, so that all his linen and
clothes were new and unmarked.  The bag, containing the dust-cloak,
which I had thrown out of the window, may have fallen among some
bramble patch where it is still concealed, or may have been carried off
by some tramp, or may have come into the possession of the police, who
kept the incident to themselves.  Anyhow, I have seen nothing about it
in the London papers.  As to the watches, they were a selection from
those which had been intrusted to him for business purposes.  It may
have been for the same business purposes that he was taking them to
Manchester, but--well, it's too late to enter into that.

"I don't blame the police for being at fault.  I don't see how it could
have been otherwise.  There was just one little clue that they might
have followed up, but it was a small one.  I mean that small, circular
mirror which was found in my brother's pocket.  It isn't a very common
thing for a young man to carry about with him, is it?  But a gambler
might have told you what such a mirror may mean to a card-sharper.  If
you sit back a little from the table, and lay the mirror, face upwards,
upon your lap, you can see, as you deal, every card that you give to
your adversary.  It is not hard to say whether you see a man or raise
him when you know his cards as well as your own.  It was as much a part
of a sharper's outfit as the elastic clip upon Sparrow MacCoy's arm.
Taking that, in connection with the recent frauds at the hotels, the
police might have got hold of one end of the string.

"I don't think there is much more for me to explain.  We got to a
village called Amersham that night in the character of two gentlemen
upon a walking tour, and afterwards we made our way quietly to London,
whence MacCoy went on to Cairo and I returned to New York.  My mother
died six months afterwards, and I am glad to say that to the day of her
death she never knew what happened.  She was always under the delusion
that Edward was earning an honest living in London, and I never had the
heart to tell her the truth. He never wrote; but, then, he never did
write at any time, so that made no difference.  His name was the last
upon her lips.

"There's just one other thing that I have to ask you, sir, and I should
take it as a kind return for all this explanation, if you could do it
for me.  You remember that Testament that was picked up.  I always
carried it in my inside pocket, and it must have come out in my fall.
I value it very highly, for it was the family book with my birth and my
brother's marked by my father in the beginning of it.  I wish you would
apply at the proper place and have it sent to me.  It can be of no
possible value to anyone else.  If you address it to X, Bassano's
Library, Broadway, New York, it is sure to come to hand."



The Japanned Box

It WAS a curious thing, said the private tutor; one of those grotesque
and whimsical incidents which occur to one as one goes through life.  I
lost the best situation which I am ever likely to have through it.  But
I am glad that I went to Thorpe Place, for I gained--well, as I tell
you the story you will learn what I gained.

I don't know whether you are familiar with that part of the Midlands
which is drained by the Avon.  It is the most English part of England.
Shakespeare, the flower of the whole race, was born right in the middle
of it.  It is a land of rolling pastures, rising in higher folds to the
westwards, until they swell into the Malvern Hills.  There are no
towns, but numerous villages, each with its grey Norman church.  You
have left the brick of the southern and eastern counties behind you,
and everything is stone--stone for the walls, and lichened slabs of
stone for the roofs.  It is all grim and solid and massive, as befits
the heart of a great nation.

It was in the middle of this country, not very far from Evesham, that
Sir John Bollamore lived in the old ancestral home of Thorpe Place, and
thither it was that I came to teach his two little sons.  Sir John was
a widower--his wife had died three years before--and he had been left
with these two lads aged eight and ten, and one dear little girl of
seven.  Miss Witherton, who is now my wife, was governess to this
little girl.  I was tutor to the two boys.  Could there be a more
obvious prelude to an engagement?  She governs me now, and I tutor two
little boys of our own.  But, there--I have already revealed what it
was which I gained in Thorpe Place!

It was a very, very old house, incredibly old--pre-Norman, some of
it--and the Bollamores claimed to have lived in that situation since
long before the Conquest.  It struck a chill to my heart when first I
came there, those enormously thick grey walls, the rude crumbling
stones, the smell as from a sick animal which exhaled from the rotting
plaster of the aged building.  But the modern wing was bright and the
garden was well kept.  No house could be dismal which had a pretty girl
inside it and such a show of roses in front.

Apart from a very complete staff of servants there were only four of us
in the household.  These were Miss Witherton, who was at that time
four-and-twenty and as pretty--well, as pretty as Mrs. Colmore is
now--myself, Frank Colmore, aged thirty, Mrs. Stevens, the housekeeper,
a dry, silent woman, and Mr. Richards, a tall military-looking man, who
acted as steward to the Bollamore estates.  We four always had our
meals together, but Sir John had his usually alone in the library.
Sometimes he joined us at dinner, but on the whole we were just as glad
when he did not.

For he was a very formidable person.  Imagine a man six feet three
inches in height, majestically built, with a high-nosed, aristocratic
face, brindled hair, shaggy eyebrows, a small, pointed Mephistophelian
beard, and lines upon his brow and round his eyes as deep as if they
had been carved with a penknife.  He had grey eyes, weary,
hopeless-looking eyes, proud and yet pathetic, eyes which claimed your
pity and yet dared you to show it.  His back was rounded with study,
but otherwise he was as fine a looking man of his age--five-and-fifty
perhaps--as any woman would wish to look upon.

But his presence was not a cheerful one.  He was always courteous,
always refined, but singularly silent and retiring.  I have never lived
so long with any man and known so little of him. If he were indoors he
spent his time either in his own small study in the Eastern Tower, or
in the library in the modern wing.  So regular was his routine that one
could always say at any hour exactly where he would be.  Twice in the
day he would visit his study, once after breakfast, and once about ten
at night.  You might set your watch by the slam of the heavy door.  For
the rest of the day he would be in his library--save that for an hour
or two in the afternoon he would take a walk or a ride, which was
solitary like the rest of his existence.  He loved his children, and
was keenly interested in the progress of their studies, but they were a
little awed by the silent, shaggy-browed figure, and they avoided him
as much as they could.  Indeed, we all did that.

It was some time before I came to know anything about the circumstances
of Sir John Bollamore's life, for Mrs. Stevens, the housekeeper, and
Mr. Richards, the land-steward, were too loyal to talk easily of their
employer's affairs.  As to the governess, she knew no more than I did,
and our common interest was one of the causes which drew us together.
At last, however, an incident occurred which led to a closer
acquaintance with Mr. Richards and a fuller knowledge of the life of
the man whom I served.

The immediate cause of this was no less than the falling of Master
Percy, the youngest of my pupils, into the mill-race, with imminent
danger both to his life and to mine, since I had to risk myself in
order to save him.  Dripping and exhausted--for I was far more spent
than the child--I was making for my room when Sir John, who had heard
the hubbub, opened the door of his little study and asked me what was
the matter.  I told him of the accident, but assured him that his child
was in no danger, while he listened with a rugged, immobile face, which
expressed in its intense eyes and tightened lips all the emotion which
he tried to conceal.

"One moment!  Step in here!  Let me have the details!" said he, turning
back through the open door.

And so I found myself within that little sanctum, inside which, as I
afterwards learned, no other foot had for three years been set save
that of the old servant who cleaned it out.  It was a round room,
conforming to the shape of the tower in which it was situated, with a
low ceiling, a single narrow, ivy-wreathed window, and the simplest of
furniture.  An old carpet, a single chair, a deal table, and a small
shelf of books made up the whole contents. On the table stood a
full-length photograph of a woman--I took no particular notice of the
features, but I remember, that a certain gracious gentleness was the
prevailing impression.  Beside it were a large black japanned box and
one or two bundles of letters or papers fastened together with elastic
bands.

Our interview was a short one, for Sir John Bollamore perceived that I
was soaked, and that I should change without delay.  The incident led,
however, to an instructive talk with Richards, the agent, who had never
penetrated into the chamber which chance had opened to me.  That very
afternoon he came to me, all curiosity, and walked up and down the
garden path with me, while my two charges played tennis upon the lawn
beside us.

"You hardly realize the exception which has been made in your favour,"
said he.  "That room has been kept such a mystery, and Sir John's
visits to it have been so regular and consistent, that an almost
superstitious feeling has arisen about it in the household. I assure
you that if I were to repeat to you the tales which are flying about,
tales of mysterious visitors there, and of voices overheard by the
servants, you might suspect that Sir John had relapsed into his old
ways."

"Why do you say relapsed?" I asked.

He looked at me in surprise.

"Is it possible," said he, "that Sir John Bollamore's previous history
is unknown to you?"

"Absolutely."

"You astound me.  I thought that every man in England knew something of
his antecedents.  I should not mention the matter if it were not that
you are now one of ourselves, and that the facts might come to your
ears in some harsher form if I were silent upon them.  I always took it
for granted that you knew that you were in the service of 'Devil'
Bollamore."

"But why 'Devil'?" I asked.

"Ah, you are young and the world moves fast, but twenty years ago the
name of 'Devil' Bollamore was one of the best known in London.  He was
the leader of the fastest set, bruiser, driver, gambler, drunkard--a
survival of the old type, and as bad as the worst of them."

I stared at him in amazement.

"What!" I cried, "that quiet, studious, sad-faced man?"

"The greatest rip and debauchee in England!  All between ourselves,
Colmore.  But you understand now what I mean when I say that a woman's
voice in his room might even now give rise to suspicions."

"But what can have changed him so?"

"Little Beryl Clare, when she took the risk of becoming his wife.  That
was the turning point.  He had got so far that his own fast set had
thrown him over.  There is a world of difference, you know, between a
man who drinks and a drunkard.  They all drink, but they taboo a
drunkard.  He had become a slave to it--hopeless and helpless.  Then
she stepped in, saw the possibilities of a fine man in the wreck, took
her chance in marrying him though she might have had the pick of a
dozen, and, by devoting her life to it, brought him back to manhood and
decency.  You have observed that no liquor is ever kept in the house.
There never has been any since her foot crossed its threshold.  A drop
of it would be like blood to a tiger even now."

"Then her influence still holds him?"

"That is the wonder of it.  When she died three years ago, we all
expected and feared that he would fall back into his old ways. She
feared it herself, and the thought gave a terror to death, for she was
like a guardian angel to that man, and lived only for the one purpose.
By the way, did you see a black japanned box in his room?"

"Yes."

"I fancy it contains her letters.  If ever he has occasion to be away,
if only for a single night, he invariably takes his black japanned box
with him.  Well, well, Colmore, perhaps I have told you rather more
than I should, but I shall expect you to reciprocate if anything of
interest should come to your knowledge."

I could see that the worthy man was consumed with curiosity and just a
little piqued that I, the newcomer, should have been the first to
penetrate into the untrodden chamber.  But the fact raised me in his
esteem, and from that time onwards I found myself upon more
confidential terms with him.

And now the silent and majestic figure of my employer became an object
of greater interest to me.  I began to understand that strangely human
look in his eyes, those deep lines upon his care-worn face.  He was a
man who was fighting a ceaseless battle, holding at arm's length, from
morning till night, a horrible adversary who was forever trying to
close with him--an adversary which would destroy him body and soul
could it but fix its claws once more upon him.  As I watched the grim,
round-backed figure pacing the corridor or walking in the garden, this
imminent danger seemed to take bodily shape, and I could almost fancy
that I saw this most loathsome and dangerous of all the fiends
crouching closely in his very shadow, like a half-cowed beast which
slinks beside its keeper, ready at any unguarded moment to spring at
his throat.  And the dead woman, the woman who had spent her life in
warding off this danger, took shape also to my imagination, and I saw
her as a shadowy but beautiful presence which intervened for ever with
arms uplifted to screen the man whom she loved.

In some subtle way he divined the sympathy which I had for him, and he
showed in his own silent fashion that he appreciated it.  He even
invited me once to share his afternoon walk, and although no word
passed between us on this occasion, it was a mark of confidence which
he had never shown to anyone before.  He asked me also to index his
library (it was one of the best private libraries in England), and I
spent many hours in the evening in his presence, if not in his society,
he reading at his desk and I sitting in a recess by the window reducing
to order the chaos which existed among his books.  In spite of these
close relations I was never again asked to enter the chamber in the
turret.

And then came my revulsion of feeling.  A single incident changed all
my sympathy to loathing, and made me realize that my employer still
remained all that he had ever been, with the additional vice of
hypocrisy.  What happened was as follows.

One evening Miss Witherton had gone down to Broadway, the neighbouring
village, to sing at a concert for some charity, and I, according to my
promise, had walked over to escort her back.  The drive sweeps round
under the eastern turret, and I observed as I passed that the light was
lit in the circular room.  It was a summer evening, and the window,
which was a little higher than our heads, was open.  We were, as it
happened, engrossed in our own conversation at the moment and we had
paused upon the lawn which skirts the old turret, when suddenly
something broke in upon our talk and turned our thoughts away from our
own affairs.

It was a voice--the voice undoubtedly of a woman.  It was low--so low
that it was only in that still night air that we could have heard it,
but, hushed as it was, there was no mistaking its feminine timbre.  It
spoke hurriedly, gaspingly for a few sentences, and then was silent--a
piteous, breathless, imploring sort of voice.  Miss Witherton and I
stood for an instant staring at each other.  Then we walked quickly in
the direction of the hall-door.

"It came through the window," I said.

"We must not play the part of eavesdroppers," she answered. "We must
forget that we have ever heard it."

There was an absence of surprise in her manner which suggested a new
idea to me.

"You have heard it before," I cried.

"I could not help it.  My own room is higher up on the same turret.  It
has happened frequently."

"Who can the woman be?"

"I have no idea.  I had rather not discuss it."

Her voice was enough to show me what she thought.  But granting that
our employer led a double and dubious life, who could she be, this
mysterious woman who kept him company in the old tower? I knew from my
own inspection how bleak and bare a room it was. She certainly did not
live there.  But in that case where did she come from?  It could not be
anyone of the household.  They were all under the vigilant eyes of Mrs.
Stevens.  The visitor must come from without.  But how?

And then suddenly I remembered how ancient this building was, and how
probable that some mediaeval passage existed in it.  There is hardly an
old castle without one.  The mysterious room was the basement of the
turret, so that if there were anything of the sort it would open
through the floor.  There were numerous cottages in the immediate
vicinity.  The other end of the secret passage might lie among some
tangle of bramble in the neighbouring copse.  I said nothing to anyone,
but I felt that the secret of my employer lay within my power.

And the more convinced I was of this the more I marvelled at the manner
in which he concealed his true nature.  Often as I watched his austere
figure, I asked myself if it were indeed possible that such a man
should be living this double life, and I tried to persuade myself that
my suspicions might after all prove to be ill-founded.  But there was
the female voice, there was the secret nightly rendezvous in the
turret-chamber--how could such facts admit of an innocent
interpretation.  I conceived a horror of the man.  I was filled with
loathing at his deep, consistent hypocrisy.

Only once during all those months did I ever see him without that sad
but impassive mask which he usually presented towards his fellow-man.
For an instant I caught a glimpse of those volcanic fires which he had
damped down so long.  The occasion was an unworthy one, for the object
of his wrath was none other than the aged charwoman whom I have already
mentioned as being the one person who was allowed within his mysterious
chamber.  I was passing the corridor which led to the turret--for my
own room lay in that direction--when I heard a sudden, startled scream,
and merged in it the husky, growling note of a man who is inarticulate
with passion.  It was the snarl of a furious wild beast.  Then I heard
his voice thrilling with anger.  "You would dare!" he cried. "You would
dare to disobey my directions!"  An instant later the charwoman passed
me, flying down the passage, white-faced and tremulous, while the
terrible voice thundered behind her.  "Go to Mrs. Stevens for your
money!  Never set foot in Thorpe Place again!"  Consumed with
curiosity, I could not help following the woman, and found her round
the corner leaning against the wall and palpitating like a frightened
rabbit.

"What is the matter, Mrs. Brown?" I asked.

"It's master!" she gasped.  "Oh, 'ow 'e frightened me!  If you had seen
'is eyes, Mr. Colmore, sir.  I thought 'e would 'ave been the death of
me."

"But what had you done?"

"Done, sir!  Nothing.  At least nothing to make so much of. Just laid
my 'and on that black box of 'is--'adn't even opened it, when in 'e
came and you 'eard the way 'e went on.  I've lost my place, and glad I
am of it, for I would never trust myself within reach of 'im again."

So it was the japanned box which was the cause of this outburst--the
box from which he would never permit himself to be separated.  What was
the connection, or was there any connection between this and the secret
visits of the lady whose voice I had overheard?  Sir John Bollamore's
wrath was enduring as well as fiery, for from that day Mrs. Brown, the
charwoman, vanished from our ken, and Thorpe Place knew her no more.

And now I wish to tell you the singular chance which solved all these
strange questions and put my employer's secret in my possession.  The
story may leave you with some lingering doubts as to whether my
curiosity did not get the better of my honour, and whether I did not
condescend to play the spy.  If you choose to think so I cannot help
it, but can only assure you that, improbable as it may appear, the
matter came about exactly as I describe it.

The first stage in this denouement was that the small room in the
turret became uninhabitable.  This occurred through the fall of the
worm-eaten oaken beam which supported the ceiling.  Rotten with age, it
snapped in the middle one morning, and brought down a quantity of
plaster with it.  Fortunately Sir John was not in the room at the time.
His precious box was rescued from amongst the debris and brought into
the library, where, henceforward, it was locked within his bureau.  Sir
John took no steps to repair the damage, and I never had an opportunity
of searching for that secret passage, the existence of which I had
surmised.  As to the lady, I had thought that this would have brought
her visits to an end, had I not one evening heard Mr. Richards asking
Mrs. Stevens who the woman was whom he had overheard talking to Sir
John in the library. I could not catch her reply, but I saw from her
manner that it was not the first time that she had had to answer or
avoid the same question.

"You've heard the voice, Colmore?" said the agent.

I confessed that I had.

"And what do YOU think of it?"

I shrugged my shoulders, and remarked that it was no business of mine.

"Come, come, you are just as curious as any of us.  Is it a woman or
not?"

"It is certainly a woman."

"Which room did you hear it from?"

"From the turret-room, before the ceiling fell."

"But I heard it from the library only last night.  I passed the doors
as I was going to bed, and I heard something wailing and praying just
as plainly as I hear you.  It may be a woman----"

"Why, what else COULD it be?"

He looked at me hard.

"There are more things in heaven and earth," said he.  "If it is a
woman, how does she get there?"

"I don't know."

"No, nor I.  But if it is the other thing--but there, for a practical
business man at the end of the nineteenth century this is rather a
ridiculous line of conversation."  He turned away, but I saw that he
felt even more than he had said.  To all the old ghost stories of
Thorpe Place a new one was being added before our very eyes.  It may by
this time have taken its permanent place, for though an explanation
came to me, it never reached the others.

And my explanation came in this way.  I had suffered a sleepless night
from neuralgia, and about midday I had taken a heavy dose of chlorodyne
to alleviate the pain.  At that time I was finishing the indexing of
Sir John Bollamore's library, and it was my custom to work there from
five till seven.  On this particular day I struggled against the double
effect of my bad night and the narcotic.  I have already mentioned that
there was a recess in the library, and in this it was my habit to work.
I settled down steadily to my task, but my weariness overcame me and,
falling back upon the settee, I dropped into a heavy sleep.

How long I slept I do not know, but it was quite dark when I awoke.
Confused by the chlorodyne which I had taken, I lay motionless in a
semi-conscious state.  The great room with its high walls covered with
books loomed darkly all round me.  A dim radiance from the moonlight
came through the farther window, and against this lighter background I
saw that Sir John Bollamore was sitting at his study table.  His
well-set head and clearly cut profile were sharply outlined against the
glimmering square behind him.  He bent as I watched him, and I heard
the sharp turning of a key and the rasping of metal upon metal.  As if
in a dream I was vaguely conscious that this was the japanned box which
stood in front of him, and that he had drawn something out of it,
something squat and uncouth, which now lay before him upon the table.
I never realized--it never occurred to my bemuddled and torpid brain
that I was intruding upon his privacy, that he imagined himself to be
alone in the room.  And then, just as it rushed upon my horrified
perceptions, and I had half risen to announce my presence, I heard a
strange, crisp, metallic clicking, and then the voice.

Yes, it was a woman's voice; there could not be a doubt of it. But a
voice so charged with entreaty and with yearning love, that it will
ring for ever in my ears.  It came with a curious faraway tinkle, but
every word was clear, though faint--very faint, for they were the last
words of a dying woman.

"I am not really gone, John," said the thin, gasping voice.  "I am here
at your very elbow, and shall be until we meet once more. I die happy
to think that morning and night you will hear my voice. Oh, John, be
strong, be strong, until we meet again."

I say that I had risen in order to announce my presence, but I could
not do so while the voice was sounding.  I could only remain half
lying, half sitting, paralysed, astounded, listening to those yearning
distant musical words.  And he--he was so absorbed that even if I had
spoken he might not have heard me.  But with the silence of the voice
came my half articulated apologies and explanations.  He sprang across
the room, switched on the electric light, and in its white glare I saw
him, his eyes gleaming with anger, his face twisted with passion, as
the hapless charwoman may have seen him weeks before.

"Mr. Colmore!" he cried.  "You here!  What is the meaning of this, sir?"

With halting words I explained it all, my neuralgia, the narcotic, my
luckless sleep and singular awakening.  As he listened the glow of
anger faded from his face, and the sad, impassive mask closed once more
over his features.

"My secret is yours, Mr. Colmore," said he.  "I have only myself to
blame for relaxing my precautions.  Half confidences are worse than no
confidences, and so you may know all since you know so much.  The story
may go where you will when I have passed away, but until then I rely
upon your sense of honour that no human soul shall hear it from your
lips.  I am proud still--God help me!--or, at least, I am proud enough
to resent that pity which this story would draw upon me.  I have smiled
at envy, and disregarded hatred, but pity is more than I can tolerate.

"You have heard the source from which the voice comes--that voice which
has, as I understand, excited so much curiosity in my household.  I am
aware of the rumours to which it has given rise. These speculations,
whether scandalous or superstitious, are such as I can disregard and
forgive.  What I should never forgive would be a disloyal spying and
eavesdropping in order to satisfy an illicit curiosity.  But of that,
Mr. Colmore, I acquit you.

"When I was a young man, sir, many years younger than you are now, I
was launched upon town without a friend or adviser, and with a purse
which brought only too many false friends and false advisers to my
side.  I drank deeply of the wine of life--if there is a man living who
has drunk more deeply he is not a man whom I envy.  My purse suffered,
my character suffered, my constitution suffered, stimulants became a
necessity to me, I was a creature from whom my memory recoils.  And it
was at that time, the time of my blackest degradation, that God sent
into my life the gentlest, sweetest spirit that ever descended as a
ministering angel from above.  She loved me, broken as I was, loved me,
and spent her life in making a man once more of that which had degraded
itself to the level of the beasts.

"But a fell disease struck her, and she withered away before my eyes.
In the hour of her agony it was never of herself, of her own sufferings
and her own death that she thought.  It was all of me.  The one pang
which her fate brought to her was the fear that when her influence was
removed I should revert to that which I had been.  It was in vain that
I made oath to her that no drop of wine would ever cross my lips.  She
knew only too well the hold that the devil had upon me--she who had
striven so to loosen it--and it haunted her night and day the thought
that my soul might again be within his grip.

"It was from some friend's gossip of the sick room that she heard of
this invention--this phonograph--and with the quick insight of a loving
woman she saw how she might use it for her ends.  She sent me to London
to procure the best which money could buy.  With her dying breath she
gasped into it the words which have held me straight ever since.
Lonely and broken, what else have I in all the world to uphold me?  But
it is enough.  Please God, I shall face her without shame when He is
pleased to reunite us! That is my secret, Mr. Colmore, and whilst I
live I leave it in your keeping."



The Black Doctor

Bishop's Crossing is a small village lying ten miles in a
south-westerly direction from Liverpool.  Here in the early seventies
there settled a doctor named Aloysius Lana.  Nothing was known locally
either of his antecedents or of the reasons which had prompted him to
come to this Lancashire hamlet.  Two facts only were certain about him;
the one that he had gained his medical qualification with some
distinction at Glasgow; the other that he came undoubtedly of a
tropical race, and was so dark that he might almost have had a strain
of the Indian in his composition. His predominant features were,
however, European, and he possessed a stately courtesy and carriage
which suggested a Spanish extraction.  A swarthy skin, raven-black
hair, and dark, sparkling eyes under a pair of heavily-tufted brows
made a strange contrast to the flaxen or chestnut rustics of England,
and the newcomer was soon known as "The Black Doctor of Bishop's
Crossing."  At first it was a term of ridicule and reproach; as the
years went on it became a title of honour which was familiar to the
whole countryside, and extended far beyond the narrow confines of the
village.

For the newcomer proved himself to be a capable surgeon and an
accomplished physician.  The practice of that district had been in the
hands of Edward Rowe, the son of Sir William Rowe, the Liverpool
consultant, but he had not inherited the talents of his father, and Dr.
Lana, with his advantages of presence and of manner, soon beat him out
of the field.  Dr. Lana's social success was as rapid as his
professional.  A remarkable surgical cure in the case of the Hon. James
Lowry, the second son of Lord Belton, was the means of introducing him
to county society, where he became a favourite through the charm of his
conversation and the elegance of his manners.  An absence of
antecedents and of relatives is sometimes an aid rather than an
impediment to social advancement, and the distinguished individuality
of the handsome doctor was its own recommendation.

His patients had one fault--and one fault only--to find with him.  He
appeared to be a confirmed bachelor.  This was the more remarkable
since the house which he occupied was a large one, and it was known
that his success in practice had enabled him to save considerable sums.
At first the local matchmakers were continually coupling his name with
one or other of the eligible ladies, but as years passed and Dr. Lana
remained unmarried, it came to be generally understood that for some
reason he must remain a bachelor.  Some even went so far as to assert
that he was already married, and that it was in order to escape the
consequence of an early misalliance that he had buried himself at
Bishop's Crossing. And, then, just as the matchmakers had finally given
him up in despair, his engagement was suddenly announced to Miss
Frances Morton, of Leigh Hall.

Miss Morton was a young lady who was well known upon the country-side,
her father, James Haldane Morton, having been the Squire of Bishop's
Crossing.  Both her parents were, however, dead, and she lived with her
only brother, Arthur Morton, who had inherited the family estate.  In
person Miss Morton was tall and stately, and she was famous for her
quick, impetuous nature and for her strength of character.  She met Dr.
Lana at a garden-party, and a friendship, which quickly ripened into
love, sprang up between them.  Nothing could exceed their devotion to
each other.  There was some discrepancy in age, he being thirty-seven,
and she twenty-four; but, save in that one respect, there was no
possible objection to be found with the match.  The engagement was in
February, and it was arranged that the marriage should take place in
August.

Upon the 3rd of June Dr. Lana received a letter from abroad. In a small
village the postmaster is also in a position to be the gossip-master,
and Mr. Bankley, of Bishop's Crossing, had many of the secrets of his
neighbours in his possession.  Of this particular letter he remarked
only that it was in a curious envelope, that it was in a man's
handwriting, that the postscript was Buenos Ayres, and the stamp of the
Argentine Republic.  It was the first letter which he had ever known
Dr. Lana to have from abroad and this was the reason why his attention
was particularly called to it before he handed it to the local postman.
It was delivered by the evening delivery of that date.

Next morning--that is, upon the 4th of June--Dr. Lana called upon Miss
Morton, and a long interview followed, from which he was observed to
return in a state of great agitation.  Miss Morton remained in her room
all that day, and her maid found her several times in tears.  In the
course of a week it was an open secret to the whole village that the
engagement was at an end, that Dr. Lana had behaved shamefully to the
young lady, and that Arthur Morton, her brother, was talking of
horse-whipping him.  In what particular respect the doctor had behaved
badly was unknown--some surmised one thing and some another; but it was
observed, and taken as the obvious sign of a guilty conscience, that he
would go for miles round rather than pass the windows of Leigh Hall,
and that he gave up attending morning service upon Sundays where he
might have met the young lady.  There was an advertisement also in the
Lancet as to the sale of a practice which mentioned no names, but which
was thought by some to refer to Bishop's Crossing, and to mean that Dr.
Lana was thinking of abandoning the scene of his success.  Such was the
position of affairs when, upon the evening of Monday, June 21st, there
came a fresh development which changed what had been a mere village
scandal into a tragedy which arrested the attention of the whole
nation.  Some detail is necessary to cause the facts of that evening to
present their full significance.

The sole occupants of the doctor's house were his housekeeper, an
elderly and most respectable woman, named Martha Woods, and a young
servant--Mary Pilling.  The coachman and the surgery-boy slept out.  It
was the custom of the doctor to sit at night in his study, which was
next the surgery in the wing of the house which was farthest from the
servants' quarters.  This side of the house had a door of its own for
the convenience of patients, so that it was possible for the doctor to
admit and receive a visitor there without the knowledge of anyone.  As
a matter of fact, when patients came late it was quite usual for him to
let them in and out by the surgery entrance, for the maid and the
housekeeper were in the habit of retiring early.

On this particular night Martha Woods went into the doctor's study at
half-past nine, and found him writing at his desk.  She bade him good
night, sent the maid to bed, and then occupied herself until a quarter
to eleven in household matters.  It was striking eleven upon the hall
clock when she went to her own room. She had been there about a quarter
of an hour or twenty minutes when she heard a cry or call, which
appeared to come from within the house.  She waited some time, but it
was not repeated.  Much alarmed, for the sound was loud and urgent, she
put on a dressing-gown, and ran at the top of her speed to the doctor's
study.

"Who's there?" cried a voice, as she tapped at the door.

"I am here, sir--Mrs. Woods."

"I beg that you will leave me in peace.  Go back to your room this
instant!" cried the voice, which was, to the best of her belief, that
of her master.  The tone was so harsh and so unlike her master's usual
manner, that she was surprised and hurt.

"I thought I heard you calling, sir," she explained, but no answer was
given to her.  Mrs. Woods looked at the clock as she returned to her
room, and it was then half-past eleven.

At some period between eleven and twelve (she could not be positive as
to the exact hour) a patient called upon the doctor and was unable to
get any reply from him.  This late visitor was Mrs. Madding, the wife
of the village grocer, who was dangerously ill of typhoid fever.  Dr.
Lana had asked her to look in the last thing and let him know how her
husband was progressing.  She observed that the light was burning in
the study, but having knocked several times at the surgery door without
response, she concluded that the doctor had been called out, and so
returned home.

There is a short, winding drive with a lamp at the end of it leading
down from the house to the road.  As Mrs. Madding emerged from the gate
a man was coming along the footpath.  Thinking that it might be Dr.
Lana returning from some professional visit, she waited for him, and
was surprised to see that it was Mr. Arthur Morton, the young squire.
In the light of the lamp she observed that his manner was excited, and
that he carried in his hand a heavy hunting-crop.  He was turning in at
the gate when she addressed him.

"The doctor is not in, sir," said she.

"How do you know that?" he asked harshly.

"I have been to the surgery door, sir."

"I see a light," said the young squire, looking up the drive. "That is
in his study, is it not?"

"Yes, sir; but I am sure that he is out."

"Well, he must come in again," said young Morton, and passed through
the gate while Mrs. Madding went upon her homeward way.

At three o'clock that morning her husband suffered a sharp relapse, and
she was so alarmed by his symptoms that she determined to call the
doctor without delay.  As she passed through the gate she was surprised
to see someone lurking among the laurel bushes. It was certainly a man,
and to the best of her belief Mr. Arthur Morton.  Preoccupied with her
own troubles, she gave no particular attention to the incident, but
hurried on upon her errand.

When she reached the house she perceived to her surprise that the light
was still burning in the study.  She therefore tapped at the surgery
door.  There was no answer.  She repeated the knocking several times
without effect.  It appeared to her to be unlikely that the doctor
would either go to bed or go out leaving so brilliant a light behind
him, and it struck Mrs. Madding that it was possible that he might have
dropped asleep in his chair.  She tapped at the study window,
therefore, but without result.  Then, finding that there was an opening
between the curtain and the woodwork, she looked through.

The small room was brilliantly lighted from a large lamp on the central
table, which was littered with the doctor's books and instruments.  No
one was visible, nor did she see anything unusual, except that in the
farther shadow thrown by the table a dingy white glove was lying upon
the carpet.  And then suddenly, as her eyes became more accustomed to
the light, a boot emerged from the other end of the shadow, and she
realized, with a thrill of horror, that what she had taken to be a
glove was the hand of a man, who was prostrate upon the floor.
Understanding that something terrible had occurred, she rang at the
front door, roused Mrs. Woods, the housekeeper, and the two women made
their way into the study, having first dispatched the maidservant to
the police-station.

At the side of the table, away from the window, Dr. Lana was discovered
stretched upon his back and quite dead.  It was evident that he had
been subjected to violence, for one of his eyes was blackened and there
were marks of bruises about his face and neck.  A slight thickening and
swelling of his features appeared to suggest that the cause of his
death had been strangulation.  He was dressed in his usual professional
clothes, but wore cloth slippers, the soles of which were perfectly
clean.  The carpet was marked all over, especially on the side of the
door, with traces of dirty boots, which were presumably left by the
murderer.  It was evident that someone had entered by the surgery door,
had killed the doctor, and had then made his escape unseen.  That the
assailant was a man was certain, from the size of the footprints and
from the nature of the injuries.  But beyond that point the police
found it very difficult to go.

There were no signs of robbery, and the doctor's gold watch was safe in
his pocket.  He kept a heavy cash-box in the room, and this was
discovered to be locked but empty.  Mrs. Woods had an impression that a
large sum was usually kept there, but the doctor had paid a heavy corn
bill in cash only that very day, and it was conjectured that it was to
this and not to a robber that the emptiness of the box was due.  One
thing in the room was missing--but that one thing was suggestive.  The
portrait of Miss Morton, which had always stood upon the side-table,
had been taken from its frame, and carried off.  Mrs. Woods had
observed it there when she waited upon her employer that evening, and
now it was gone.  On the other hand, there was picked up from the floor
a green eye-patch, which the housekeeper could not remember to have
seen before.  Such a patch might, however, be in the possession of a
doctor, and there was nothing to indicate that it was in any way
connected with the crime.

Suspicion could only turn in one direction, and Arthur Morton, the
young squire, was immediately arrested.  The evidence against him was
circumstantial, but damning.  He was devoted to his sister, and it was
shown that since the rupture between her and Dr. Lana he had been heard
again and again to express himself in the most vindictive terms towards
her former lover.  He had, as stated, been seen somewhere about eleven
o'clock entering the doctor's drive with a hunting-crop in his hand.
He had then, according to the theory of the police, broken in upon the
doctor, whose exclamation of fear or of anger had been loud enough to
attract the attention of Mrs. Woods.  When Mrs. Woods descended, Dr.
Lana had made up his mind to talk it over with his visitor, and had,
therefore, sent his housekeeper back to her room.  This conversation
had lasted a long time, had become more and more fiery, and had ended
by a personal struggle, in which the doctor lost his life.  The fact,
revealed by a post-mortem, that his heart was much diseased--an ailment
quite unsuspected during his life--would make it possible that death
might in his case ensue from injuries which would not be fatal to a
healthy man.  Arthur Morton had then removed his sister's photograph,
and had made his way homeward, stepping aside into the laurel bushes to
avoid Mrs. Madding at the gate.  This was the theory of the
prosecution, and the case which they presented was a formidable one.

On the other hand, there were some strong points for the defence.
Morton was high-spirited and impetuous, like his sister, but he was
respected and liked by everyone, and his frank and honest nature seemed
to be incapable of such a crime.  His own explanation was that he was
anxious to have a conversation with Dr. Lana about some urgent family
matters (from first to last he refused even to mention the name of his
sister).  He did not attempt to deny that this conversation would
probably have been of an unpleasant nature.  He had heard from a
patient that the doctor was out, and he therefore waited until about
three in the morning for his return, but as he had seen nothing of him
up to that hour, he had given it up and had returned home.  As to his
death, he knew no more about it than the constable who arrested him.
He had formerly been an intimate friend of the deceased man; but
circumstances, which he would prefer not to mention, had brought about
a change in his sentiments.

There were several facts which supported his innocence.  It was certain
that Dr. Lana was alive and in his study at half-past eleven o'clock.
Mrs. Woods was prepared to swear that it was at that hour that she had
heard his voice.  The friends of the prisoner contended that it was
probable that at that time Dr. Lana was not alone.  The sound which had
originally attracted the attention of the housekeeper, and her master's
unusual impatience that she should leave him in peace, seemed to point
to that.  If this were so then it appeared to be probable that he had
met his end between the moment when the housekeeper heard his voice and
the time when Mrs. Madding made her first call and found it impossible
to attract his attention.  But if this were the time of his death, then
it was certain that Mr. Arthur Morton could not be guilty, as it was
AFTER this that she had met the young squire at the gate.

If this hypothesis were correct, and someone was with Dr. Lana before
Mrs. Madding met Mr. Arthur Morton, then who was this someone, and what
motives had he for wishing evil to the doctor? It was universally
admitted that if the friends of the accused could throw light upon
this, they would have gone a long way towards establishing his
innocence.  But in the meanwhile it was open to the public to say--as
they did say--that there was no proof that anyone had been there at all
except the young squire; while, on the other hand, there was ample
proof that his motives in going were of a sinister kind.  When Mrs.
Madding called, the doctor might have retired to his room, or he might,
as she thought at the time, have gone out and returned afterwards to
find Mr. Arthur Morton waiting for him.  Some of the supporters of the
accused laid stress upon the fact that the photograph of his sister
Frances, which had been removed from the doctor's room, had not been
found in her brother's possession.  This argument, however, did not
count for much, as he had ample time before his arrest to burn it or to
destroy it.  As to the only positive evidence in the case--the muddy
footmarks upon the floor--they were so blurred by the softness of the
carpet that it was impossible to make any trustworthy deduction from
them.  The most that could be said was that their appearance was not
inconsistent with the theory that they were made by the accused, and it
was further shown that his boots were very muddy upon that night.
There had been a heavy shower in the afternoon, and all boots were
probably in the same condition.

Such is a bald statement of the singular and romantic series of events
which centred public attention upon this Lancashire tragedy. The
unknown origin of the doctor, his curious and distinguished
personality, the position of the man who was accused of the murder, and
the love affair which had preceded the crimes all combined to make the
affair one of those dramas which absorb the whole interest of a nation.
Throughout the three kingdoms men discussed the case of the Black
Doctor of Bishop's Crossing, and many were the theories put forward to
explain the facts; but it may safely be said that among them all there
was not one which prepared the minds of the public for the
extraordinary sequel, which caused so much excitement upon the first
day of the trial, and came to a climax upon the second.  The long files
of the Lancaster Weekly with their report of the case lie before me as
I write, but I must content myself with a synopsis of the case up to
the point when, upon the evening of the first day, the evidence of Miss
Frances Morton threw a singular light upon the case.

Mr. Porlock Carr, the counsel for the prosecution, had marshalled his
facts with his usual skill, and as the day wore on, it became more and
more evident how difficult was the task which Mr. Humphrey, who had
been retained for the defence, had before him.  Several witnesses were
put up to swear to the intemperate expressions which the young squire
had been heard to utter about the doctor, and the fiery manner in which
he resented the alleged ill-treatment of his sister.  Mrs. Madding
repeated her evidence as to the visit which had been paid late at night
by the prisoner to the deceased, and it was shown by another witness
that the prisoner was aware that the doctor was in the habit of sitting
up alone in this isolated wing of the house, and that he had chosen
this very late hour to call because he knew that his victim would then
be at his mercy.  A servant at the squire's house was compelled to
admit that he had heard his master return about three that morning,
which corroborated Mrs. Madding's statement that she had seen him among
the laurel bushes near the gate upon the occasion of her second visit.
The muddy boots and an alleged similarity in the footprints were duly
dwelt upon, and it was felt when the case for the prosecution had been
presented that, however circumstantial it might be, it was none the
less so complete and so convincing, that the fate of the prisoner was
sealed, unless something quite unexpected should be disclosed by the
defence.  It was three o'clock when the prosecution closed.  At
half-past four, when the court rose, a new and unlooked-for development
had occurred.  I extract the incident, or part of it, from the journal
which I have already mentioned, omitting the preliminary observations
of the counsel.


Considerable sensation was caused in the crowded court when the first
witness called for the defence proved to be Miss Frances Morton, the
sister of the prisoner.  Our readers will remember that the young lady
had been engaged to Dr. Lana, and that it was his anger over the sudden
termination of this engagement which was thought to have driven her
brother to the perpetration of this crime.  Miss Morton had not,
however, been directly implicated in the case in any way, either at the
inquest or at the police-court proceedings, and her appearance as the
leading witness for the defence came as a surprise upon the public.

Miss Frances Morton, who was a tall and handsome brunette, gave her
evidence in a low but clear voice, though it was evident throughout
that she was suffering from extreme emotion.  She alluded to her
engagement to the doctor, touched briefly upon its termination, which
was due, she said, to personal matters connected with his family, and
surprised the court by asserting that she had always considered her
brother's resentment to be unreasonable and intemperate.  In answer to
a direct question from her counsel, she replied that she did not feel
that she had any grievance whatever against Dr. Lana, and that in her
opinion he had acted in a perfectly honourable manner.  Her brother, on
an insufficient knowledge of the facts, had taken another view, and she
was compelled to acknowledge that, in spite of her entreaties, he had
uttered threats of personal violence against the doctor, and had, upon
the evening of the tragedy, announced his intention of "having it out
with him."  She had done her best to bring him to a more reasonable
frame of mind, but he was very headstrong where his emotions or
prejudices were concerned.

Up to this point the young lady's evidence had appeared to make against
the prisoner rather than in his favour.  The questions of her counsel,
however, soon put a very different light upon the matter, and disclosed
an unexpected line of defence.

Mr. Humphrey:  Do you believe your brother to be guilty of this crime?

The Judge:  I cannot permit that question, Mr. Humphrey.  We are here
to decide upon questions of fact--not of belief.

Mr. Humphrey:  Do you know that your brother is not guilty of the death
of Doctor Lana?

Miss Morton:  Yes.

Mr. Humphrey:  How do you know it?

Miss Morton:  Because Dr. Lana is not dead.

There followed a prolonged sensation in court, which interrupted the
examination of the witness.

Mr. Humphrey:  And how do you know, Miss Morton, that Dr. Lana is not
dead?

Miss Morton:  Because I have received a letter from him since the date
of his supposed death.

Mr. Humphrey:  Have you this letter?

Miss Morton:  Yes, but I should prefer not to show it.

Mr. Humphrey:  Have you the envelope?

Miss Morton:  Yes, it is here.

Mr. Humphrey:  What is the post-mark?

Miss Morton:  Liverpool.

Mr. Humphrey:  And the date?

Miss Morton:  June the 22nd.

Mr. Humphrey:  That being the day after his alleged death.  Are you
prepared to swear to this handwriting, Miss Morton?

Miss Morton:  Certainly.

Mr. Humphrey:  I am prepared to call six other witnesses, my lord, to
testify that this letter is in the writing of Doctor Lana.

The Judge:  Then you must call them tomorrow.

Mr. Porlock Carr (counsel for the prosecution): In the meantime, my
lord, we claim possession of this document, so that we may obtain
expert evidence as to how far it is an imitation of the handwriting of
the gentleman whom we still confidently assert to be deceased.  I need
not point out that the theory so unexpectedly sprung upon us may prove
to be a very obvious device adopted by the friends of the prisoner in
order to divert this inquiry.  I would draw attention to the fact that
the young lady must, according to her own account, have possessed this
letter during the proceedings at the inquest and at the police-court.
She desires us to believe that she permitted these to proceed, although
she held in her pocket evidence which would at any moment have brought
them to an end.

Mr. Humphrey.  Can you explain this, Miss Morton?

Miss Morton:  Dr. Lana desired his secret to be preserved.

Mr. Porlock Carr:  Then why have you made this public?

Miss Morton:  To save my brother.

A murmur of sympathy broke out in court, which was instantly suppressed
by the Judge.

The Judge:  Admitting this line of defence, it lies with you, Mr.
Humphrey, to throw a light upon who this man is whose body has been
recognized by so many friends and patients of Dr. Lana as being that of
the doctor himself.

A Juryman:  Has anyone up to now expressed any doubt about the matter?

Mr. Porlock Carr:  Not to my knowledge.

Mr. Humphrey:  We hope to make the matter clear.

The Judge:  Then the court adjourns until tomorrow.


This new development of the case excited the utmost interest among the
general public.  Press comment was prevented by the fact that the trial
was still undecided, but the question was everywhere argued as to how
far there could be truth in Miss Morton's declaration, and how far it
might be a daring ruse for the purpose of saving her brother.  The
obvious dilemma in which the missing doctor stood was that if by any
extraordinary chance he was not dead, then he must be held responsible
for the death of this unknown man, who resembled him so exactly, and
who was found in his study.  This letter which Miss Morton refused to
produce was possibly a confession of guilt, and she might find herself
in the terrible position of only being able to save her brother from
the gallows by the sacrifice of her former lover.  The court next
morning was crammed to overflowing, and a murmur of excitement passed
over it when Mr. Humphrey was observed to enter in a state of emotion,
which even his trained nerves could not conceal, and to confer with the
opposing counsel.  A few hurried words--words which left a look of
amazement upon Mr. Porlock Carr's face--passed between them, and then
the counsel for the defence, addressing the Judge, announced that, with
the consent of the prosecution, the young lady who had given evidence
upon the sitting before would not be recalled.


The Judge: But you appear, Mr. Humphrey, to have left matters in a very
unsatisfactory state.

Mr. Humphrey:  Perhaps, my lord, my next witness may help to clear them
up.

The Judge:  Then call your next witness.

Mr. Humphrey:  I call Dr. Aloysius Lana.

The learned counsel has made many telling remarks in his day, but he
has certainly never produced such a sensation with so short a sentence.
The court was simply stunned with amazement as the very man whose fate
had been the subject of so much contention appeared bodily before them
in the witness-box.  Those among the spectators who had known him at
Bishop's Crossing saw him now, gaunt and thin, with deep lines of care
upon his face.  But in spite of his melancholy bearing and despondent
expression, there were few who could say that they had ever seen a man
of more distinguished presence.  Bowing to the judge, he asked if he
might be allowed to make a statement, and having been duly informed
that whatever he said might be used against him, he bowed once more,
and proceeded:

"My wish," said he, "is to hold nothing back, but to tell with perfect
frankness all that occurred upon the night of the 21st of June.  Had I
known that the innocent had suffered, and that so much trouble had been
brought upon those whom I love best in the world, I should have come
forward long ago; but there were reasons which prevented these things
from coming to my ears.  It was my desire that an unhappy man should
vanish from the world which had known him, but I had not foreseen that
others would be affected by my actions.  Let me to the best of my
ability repair the evil which I have done.

"To anyone who is acquainted with the history of the Argentine Republic
the name of Lana is well known.  My father, who came of the best blood
of old Spain, filled all the highest offices of the State, and would
have been President but for his death in the riots of San Juan.  A
brilliant career might have been open to my twin brother Ernest and
myself had it not been for financial losses which made it necessary
that we should earn our own living.  I apologize, sir, if these details
appear to be irrelevant, but they are a necessary introduction to that
which is to follow.

"I had, as I have said, a twin brother named Ernest, whose resemblance
to me was so great that even when we were together people could see no
difference between us.  Down to the smallest detail we were exactly the
same.  As we grew older this likeness became less marked because our
expression was not the same, but with our features in repose the points
of difference were very slight.

"It does not become me to say too much of one who is dead, the more so
as he is my only brother, but I leave his character to those who knew
him best.  I will only say--for I HAVE to say it--that in my early
manhood I conceived a horror of him, and that I had good reason for the
aversion which filled me.  My own reputation suffered from his actions,
for our close resemblance caused me to be credited with many of them.
Eventually, in a peculiarly disgraceful business, he contrived to throw
the whole odium upon me in such a way that I was forced to leave the
Argentine for ever, and to seek a career in Europe.  The freedom from
his hated presence more than compensated me for the loss of my native
land.  I had enough money to defray my medical studies at Glasgow, and
I finally settled in practice at Bishop's Crossing, in the firm
conviction that in that remote Lancashire hamlet I should never hear of
him again.

"For years my hopes were fulfilled, and then at last he discovered me.
Some Liverpool man who visited Buenos Ayres put him upon my track.  He
had lost all his money, and he thought that he would come over and
share mine.  Knowing my horror of him, he rightly thought that I would
be willing to buy him off.  I received a letter from him saying that he
was coming.  It was at a crisis in my own affairs, and his arrival
might conceivably bring trouble, and even disgrace, upon some whom I
was especially bound to shield from anything of the kind.  I took steps
to insure that any evil which might come should fall on me only, and
that"--here he turned and looked at the prisoner--"was the cause of
conduct upon my part which has been too harshly judged.  My only motive
was to screen those who were dear to me from any possible connection
with scandal or disgrace.  That scandal and disgrace would come with my
brother was only to say that what had been would be again.

"My brother arrived himself one night not very long after my receipt of
the letter.  I was sitting in my study after the servants had gone to
bed, when I heard a footstep upon the gravel outside, and an instant
later I saw his face looking in at me through the window.  He was a
clean-shaven man like myself, and the resemblance between us was still
so great that, for an instant, I thought it was my own reflection in
the glass.  He had a dark patch over his eye, but our features were
absolutely the same.  Then he smiled in a sardonic way which had been a
trick of his from his boyhood, and I knew that he was the same brother
who had driven me from my native land, and brought disgrace upon what
had been an honourable name.  I went to the door and I admitted him.
That would be about ten o'clock that night.

"When he came into the glare of the lamp, I saw at once that he had
fallen upon very evil days.  He had walked from Liverpool, and he was
tired and ill.  I was quite shocked by the expression upon his face.
My medical knowledge told me that there was some serious internal
malady.  He had been drinking also, and his face was bruised as the
result of a scuffle which he had had with some sailors.  It was to
cover his injured eye that he wore this patch, which he removed when he
entered the room.  He was himself dressed in a pea-jacket and flannel
shirt, and his feet were bursting through his boots.  But his poverty
had only made him more savagely vindictive towards me.  His hatred rose
to the height of a mania. I had been rolling in money in England,
according to his account, while he had been starving in South America.
I cannot describe to you the threats which he uttered or the insults
which he poured upon me.  My impression is, that hardships and
debauchery had unhinged his reason.  He paced about the room like a
wild beast, demanding drink, demanding money, and all in the foulest
language. I am a hot-tempered man, but I thank God that I am able to
say that I remained master of myself, and that I never raised a hand
against him.  My coolness only irritated him the more.  He raved, he
cursed, he shook his fists in my face, and then suddenly a horrible
spasm passed over his features, he clapped his hand to his side, and
with a loud cry he fell in a heap at my feet.  I raised him up and
stretched him upon the sofa, but no answer came to my exclamations, and
the hand which I held in mine was cold and clammy.  His diseased heart
had broken down.  His own violence had killed him.

"For a long time I sat as if I were in some dreadful dream, staring at
the body of my brother.  I was aroused by the knocking of Mrs. Woods,
who had been disturbed by that dying cry.  I sent her away to bed.
Shortly afterwards a patient tapped at the surgery door, but as I took
no notice, he or she went off again. Slowly and gradually as I sat
there a plan was forming itself in my head in the curious automatic way
in which plans do form.  When I rose from my chair my future movements
were finally decided upon without my having been conscious of any
process of thought.  It was an instinct which irresistibly inclined me
towards one course.

"Ever since that change in my affairs to which I have alluded, Bishop's
Crossing had become hateful to me.  My plans of life had been ruined,
and I had met with hasty judgments and unkind treatment where I had
expected sympathy.  It is true that any danger of scandal from my
brother had passed away with his life; but still, I was sore about the
past, and felt that things could never be as they had been.  It may be
that I was unduly sensitive, and that I had not made sufficient
allowance for others, but my feelings were as I describe.  Any chance
of getting away from Bishop's Crossing and of everyone in it would be
most welcome to me.  And here was such a chance as I could never have
dared to hope for, a chance which would enable me to make a clean break
with the past.

"There was this dead man lying upon the sofa, so like me that save for
some little thickness and coarseness of the features there was no
difference at all.  No one had seen him come and no one would miss him.
We were both clean-shaven, and his hair was about the same length as my
own.  If I changed clothes with him, then Dr. Aloysius Lana would be
found lying dead in his study, and there would be an end of an
unfortunate fellow, and of a blighted career. There was plenty of ready
money in the room, and this I could carry away with me to help me to
start once more in some other land.  In my brother's clothes I could
walk by night unobserved as far as Liverpool, and in that great seaport
I would soon find some means of leaving the country.  After my lost
hopes, the humblest existence where I was unknown was far preferable,
in my estimation, to a practice, however successful, in Bishop's
Crossing, where at any moment I might come face to face with those whom
I should wish, if it were possible, to forget.  I determined to effect
the change.

"And I did so.  I will not go into particulars, for the recollection is
as painful as the experience; but in an hour my brother lay, dressed
down to the smallest detail in my clothes, while I slunk out by the
surgery door, and taking the back path which led across some fields, I
started off to make the best of my way to Liverpool, where I arrived
the same night.  My bag of money and a certain portrait were all I
carried out of the house, and I left behind me in my hurry the shade
which my brother had been wearing over his eye.  Everything else of his
I took with me.

"I give you my word, sir, that never for one instant did the idea occur
to me that people might think that I had been murdered, nor did I
imagine that anyone might be caused serious danger through this
stratagem by which I endeavoured to gain a fresh start in the world.
On the contrary, it was the thought of relieving others from the burden
of my presence which was always uppermost in my mind.  A sailing vessel
was leaving Liverpool that very day for Corunna, and in this I took my
passage, thinking that the voyage would give me time to recover my
balance, and to consider the future.  But before I left my resolution
softened.  I bethought me that there was one person in the world to
whom I would not cause an hour of sadness.  She would mourn me in her
heart, however harsh and unsympathetic her relatives might be.  She
understood and appreciated the motives upon which I had acted, and if
the rest of her family condemned me, she, at least, would not forget.
And so I sent her a note under the seal of secrecy to save her from a
baseless grief.  If under the pressure of events she broke that seal,
she has my entire sympathy and forgiveness.

"It was only last night that I returned to England, and during all this
time I have heard nothing of the sensation which my supposed death had
caused, nor of the accusation that Mr. Arthur Morton had been concerned
in it.  It was in a late evening paper that I read an account of the
proceedings of yesterday, and I have come this morning as fast as an
express train could bring me to testify to the truth."

Such was the remarkable statement of Dr. Aloysius Lana which brought
the trial to a sudden termination.  A subsequent investigation
corroborated it to the extent of finding out the vessel in which his
brother Ernest Lana had come over from South America.  The ship's
doctor was able to testify that he had complained of a weak heart
during the voyage, and that his symptoms were consistent with such a
death as was described.

As to Dr. Aloysius Lana, he returned to the village from which he had
made so dramatic a disappearance, and a complete reconciliation was
effected between him and the young squire, the latter having
acknowledged that he had entirely misunderstood the other's motives in
withdrawing from his engagement.  That another reconciliation followed
may be judged from a notice extracted from a prominent column in the
Morning Post:


"A marriage was solemnized upon September 19th, by the Rev. Stephen
Johnson, at the parish church of Bishop's Crossing, between Aloysius
Xavier Lana, son of Don Alfredo Lana, formerly Foreign Minister of the
Argentine Republic, and Frances Morton, only daughter of the late James
Morton, J.P., of Leigh Hall, Bishop's Crossing, Lancashire."



The Jew's Breastplate

My particular friend, Ward Mortimer, was one of the best men of his day
at everything connected with Oriental archaeology.  He had written
largely upon the subject, he had lived two years in a tomb at Thebes,
while he excavated in the Valley of the Kings, and finally he had
created a considerable sensation by his exhumation of the alleged mummy
of Cleopatra in the inner room of the Temple of Horus, at Philae.  With
such a record at the age of thirty-one, it was felt that a considerable
career lay before him, and no one was surprised when he was elected to
the curatorship of the Belmore Street Museum, which carries with it the
lectureship at the Oriental College, and an income which has sunk with
the fall in land, but which still remains at that ideal sum which is
large enough to encourage an investigator, but not so large as to
enervate him.

There was only one reason which made Ward Mortimer's position a little
difficult at the Belmore Street Museum, and that was the extreme
eminence of the man whom he had to succeed.  Professor Andreas was a
profound scholar and a man of European reputation. His lectures were
frequented by students from every part of the world, and his admirable
management of the collection intrusted to his care was a commonplace in
all learned societies.  There was, therefore, considerable surprise
when, at the age of fifty-five, he suddenly resigned his position and
retired from those duties which had been both his livelihood and his
pleasure.  He and his daughter left the comfortable suite of rooms
which had formed his official residence in connection with the museum,
and my friend, Mortimer, who was a bachelor, took up his quarters there.

On hearing of Mortimer's appointment Professor Andreas had written him
a very kindly and flattering congratulatory letter.  I was actually
present at their first meeting, and I went with Mortimer round the
museum when the Professor showed us the admirable collection which he
had cherished so long.  The Professor's beautiful daughter and a young
man, Captain Wilson, who was, as I understood, soon to be her husband,
accompanied us in our inspection.  There were fifteen rooms, but the
Babylonian, the Syrian, and the central hall, which contained the
Jewish and Egyptian collection, were the finest of all.  Professor
Andreas was a quiet, dry, elderly man, with a clean-shaven face and an
impassive manner, but his dark eyes sparkled and his features quickened
into enthusiastic life as he pointed out to us the rarity and the
beauty of some of his specimens.  His hand lingered so fondly over
them, that one could read his pride in them and the grief in his heart
now that they were passing from his care into that of another.

He had shown us in turn his mummies, his papyri, his rare scarabs, his
inscriptions, his Jewish relics, and his duplication of the famous
seven-branched candlestick of the Temple, which was brought to Rome by
Titus, and which is supposed by some to be lying at this instant in the
bed of the Tiber.  Then he approached a case which stood in the very
centre of the hall, and he looked down through the glass with reverence
in his attitude and manner.

"This is no novelty to an expert like yourself, Mr. Mortimer," said he;
"but I daresay that your friend, Mr. Jackson, will be interested to see
it."

Leaning over the case I saw an object, some five inches square, which
consisted of twelve precious stones in a framework of gold, with golden
hooks at two of the corners.  The stones were all varying in sort and
colour, but they were of the same size.  Their shapes, arrangement, and
gradation of tint made me think of a box of water-colour paints.  Each
stone had some hieroglyphic scratched upon its surface.

"You have heard, Mr. Jackson, of the urim and thummim?"

I had heard the term, but my idea of its meaning was exceedingly vague.

"The urim and thummim was a name given to the jewelled plate which lay
upon the breast of the high priest of the Jews.  They had a very
special feeling of reverence for it--something of the feeling which an
ancient Roman might have for the Sibylline books in the Capitol.  There
are, as you see, twelve magnificent stones, inscribed with mystical
characters.  Counting from the left-hand top corner, the stones are
carnelian, peridot, emerald, ruby, lapis lazuli, onyx, sapphire, agate,
amethyst, topaz, beryl, and jasper."

I was amazed at the variety and beauty of the stones.

"Has the breastplate any particular history?" I asked.

"It is of great age and of immense value," said Professor Andreas.
"Without being able to make an absolute assertion, we have many reasons
to think that it is possible that it may be the original urim and
thummim of Solomon's Temple.  There is certainly nothing so fine in any
collection in Europe.  My friend, Captain Wilson, here, is a practical
authority upon precious stones, and he would tell you how pure these
are."

Captain Wilson, a man with a dark, hard, incisive face, was standing
beside his fiancee at the other side of the case.

"Yes," said he, curtly, "I have never seen finer stones."

"And the gold-work is also worthy of attention.  The ancients excelled
in----"--he was apparently about to indicate the setting of the stones,
when Captain Wilson interrupted him.

"You will see a finer example of their gold-work in this candlestick,"
said he, turning to another table, and we all joined him in his
admiration of its embossed stem and delicately ornamented branches.
Altogether it was an interesting and a novel experience to have objects
of such rarity explained by so great an expert; and when, finally,
Professor Andreas finished our inspection by formally handing over the
precious collection to the care of my friend, I could not help pitying
him and envying his successor whose life was to pass in so pleasant a
duty.  Within a week, Ward Mortimer was duly installed in his new set
of rooms, and had become the autocrat of the Belmore Street Museum.

About a fortnight afterwards my friend gave a small dinner to half a
dozen bachelor friends to celebrate his promotion.  When his guests
were departing he pulled my sleeve and signalled to me that he wished
me to remain.

"You have only a few hundred yards to go," said he--I was living in
chambers in the Albany.  "You may as well stay and have a quiet cigar
with me.  I very much want your advice."

I relapsed into an arm-chair and lit one of his excellent Matronas.
When he had returned from seeing the last of his guests out, he drew a
letter from his dress-jacket and sat down opposite to me.

"This is an anonymous letter which I received this morning," said he.
"I want to read it to you and to have your advice."

"You are very welcome to it for what it is worth."

"This is how the note runs:  'Sir,--I should strongly advise you to
keep a very careful watch over the many valuable things which are
committed to your charge.  I do not think that the present system of a
single watchman is sufficient.  Be upon your guard, or an irreparable
misfortune may occur.'"

"Is that all?"

"Yes, that is all."

"Well," said I, "it is at least obvious that it was written by one of
the limited number of people who are aware that you have only one
watchman at night."

Ward Mortimer handed me the note, with a curious smile.  "Have you an
eye for handwriting?" said he.  "Now, look at this!"  He put another
letter in front of me.  "Look at the c in 'congratulate' and the c in
'committed.'  Look at the capital I.  Look at the trick of putting in a
dash instead of a stop!"

"They are undoubtedly from the same hand--with some attempt at disguise
in the case of this first one."

"The second," said Ward Mortimer, "is the letter of congratulation
which was written to me by Professor Andreas upon my obtaining my
appointment."

I stared at him in amazement.  Then I turned over the letter in my
hand, and there, sure enough, was "Martin Andreas" signed upon the
other side.  There could be no doubt, in the mind of anyone who had the
slightest knowledge of the science of graphology, that the Professor
had written an anonymous letter, warning his successor against thieves.
It was inexplicable, but it was certain.

"Why should he do it?" I asked.

"Precisely what I should wish to ask you.  If he had any such
misgivings, why could he not come and tell me direct?"

"Will you speak to him about it?"

"There again I am in doubt.  He might choose to deny that he wrote it."

"At any rate," said I, "this warning is meant in a friendly spirit, and
I should certainly act upon it.  Are the present precautions enough to
insure you against robbery?"

"I should have thought so.  The public are only admitted from ten till
five, and there is a guardian to every two rooms.  He stands at the
door between them, and so commands them both."

"But at night?"

"When the public are gone, we at once put up the great iron shutters,
which are absolutely burglar-proof.  The watchman is a capable fellow.
He sits in the lodge, but he walks round every three hours.  We keep
one electric light burning in each room all night."

"It is difficult to suggest anything more--short of keeping your day
watches all night."

"We could not afford that."

"At least, I should communicate with the police, and have a special
constable put on outside in Belmore Street," said I.  "As to the
letter, if the writer wishes to be anonymous, I think he has a right to
remain so.  We must trust to the future to show some reason for the
curious course which he has adopted."

So we dismissed the subject, but all that night after my return to my
chambers I was puzzling my brain as to what possible motive Professor
Andreas could have for writing an anonymous warning letter to his
successor--for that the writing was his was as certain to me as if I
had seen him actually doing it.  He foresaw some danger to the
collection.  Was it because he foresaw it that he abandoned his charge
of it?  But if so, why should he hesitate to warn Mortimer in his own
name?  I puzzled and puzzled until at last I fell into a troubled
sleep, which carried me beyond my usual hour of rising.

I was aroused in a singular and effective method, for about nine
o'clock my friend Mortimer rushed into my room with an expression of
consternation upon his face.  He was usually one of the most tidy men
of my acquaintance, but now his collar was undone at one end, his tie
was flying, and his hat at the back of his head.  I read his whole
story in his frantic eyes.

"The museum has been robbed!" I cried, springing up in bed.

"I fear so!  Those jewels!  The jewels of the urim and thummim!" he
gasped, for he was out of breath with running.  "I'm going on to the
police-station.  Come to the museum as soon as you can, Jackson!
Good-bye!"  He rushed distractedly out of the room, and I heard him
clatter down the stairs.

I was not long in following his directions, but I found when I arrived
that he had already returned with a police inspector, and another
elderly gentleman, who proved to be Mr. Purvis, one of the partners of
Morson and Company, the well-known diamond merchants. As an expert in
stones he was always prepared to advise the police. They were grouped
round the case in which the breastplate of the Jewish priest had been
exposed.  The plate had been taken out and laid upon the glass top of
the case, and the three heads were bent over it.

"It is obvious that it has been tampered with," said Mortimer. "It
caught my eye the moment that I passed through the room this morning.
I examined it yesterday evening, so that it is certain that this has
happened during the night."

It was, as he had said, obvious that someone had been at work upon it.
The settings of the uppermost row of four stones--the carnelian,
peridot, emerald, and ruby--were rough and jagged as if someone had
scraped all round them.  The stones were in their places, but the
beautiful gold-work which we had admired only a few days before had
been very clumsily pulled about.

"It looks to me," said the police inspector, "as if someone had been
trying to take out the stones."

"My fear is," said Mortimer, "that he not only tried, but succeeded.  I
believe these four stones to be skilful imitations which have been put
in the place of the originals."

The same suspicion had evidently been in the mind of the expert, for he
had been carefully examining the four stones with the aid of a lens.
He now submitted them to several tests, and finally turned cheerfully
to Mortimer.

"I congratulate you, sir," said he, heartily.  "I will pledge my
reputation that all four of these stones are genuine, and of a most
unusual degree of purity."

The colour began to come back to my poor friend's frightened face, and
he drew a long breath of relief.

"Thank God!" he cried.  "Then what in the world did the thief want?"

"Probably he meant to take the stones, but was interrupted."

"In that case one would expect him to take them out one at a time, but
the setting of each of these has been loosened, and yet the stones are
all here."

"It is certainly most extraordinary," said the inspector.  "I never
remember a case like it.  Let us see the watchman."

The commissionaire was called--a soldierly, honest-faced man, who
seemed as concerned as Ward Mortimer at the incident.

"No, sir, I never heard a sound," he answered, in reply to the
questions of the inspector.  "I made my rounds four times, as usual,
but I saw nothing suspicious.  I've been in my position ten years, but
nothing of the kind has ever occurred before."

"No thief could have come through the windows?"

"Impossible, sir."

"Or passed you at the door?"

"No, sir; I never left my post except when I walked my rounds."

"What other openings are there in the museum?"

"There is the door into Mr. Ward Mortimer's private rooms."

"That is locked at night," my friend explained, "and in order to reach
it anyone from the street would have to open the outside door as well."

"Your servants?"

"Their quarters are entirely separate."

"Well, well," said the inspector, "this is certainly very obscure.
However, there has been no harm done, according to Mr. Purvis."

"I will swear that those stones are genuine."

"So that the case appears to be merely one of malicious damage. But
none the less, I should be very glad to go carefully round the
premises, and to see if we can find any trace to show us who your
visitor may have been."

His investigation, which lasted all the morning, was careful and
intelligent, but it led in the end to nothing.  He pointed out to us
that there were two possible entrances to the museum which we had not
considered.  The one was from the cellars by a trap-door opening in the
passage.  The other through a skylight from the lumber-room,
overlooking that very chamber to which the intruder had penetrated.  As
neither the cellar nor the lumber-room could be entered unless the
thief was already within the locked doors, the matter was not of any
practical importance, and the dust of cellar and attic assured us that
no one had used either one or the other.  Finally, we ended as we
began, without the slightest clue as to how, why, or by whom the
setting of these four jewels had been tampered with.

There remained one course for Mortimer to take, and he took it. Leaving
the police to continue their fruitless researches, he asked me to
accompany him that afternoon in a visit to Professor Andreas. He took
with him the two letters, and it was his intention to openly tax his
predecessor with having written the anonymous warning, and to ask him
to explain the fact that he should have anticipated so exactly that
which had actually occurred.  The Professor was living in a small villa
in Upper Norwood, but we were informed by the servant that he was away
from home.  Seeing our disappointment, she asked us if we should like
to see Miss Andreas, and showed us into the modest drawing-room.

I have mentioned incidentally that the Professor's daughter was a very
beautiful girl.  She was a blonde, tall and graceful, with a skin of
that delicate tint which the French call "mat," the colour of old
ivory, or of the lighter petals of the sulphur rose. I was shocked,
however, as she entered the room to see how much she had changed in the
last fortnight.  Her young face was haggard and her bright eyes heavy
with trouble.

"Father has gone to Scotland," she said.  "He seems to be tired, and
has had a good deal to worry him.  He only left us yesterday."

"You look a little tired yourself, Miss Andreas," said my friend.

"I have been so anxious about father."

"Can you give me his Scotch address?"

"Yes, he is with his brother, the Rev. David Andreas, 1, Arran Villas,
Ardrossan."

Ward Mortimer made a note of the address, and we left without saying
anything as to the object of our visit.  We found ourselves in Belmore
Street in the evening in exactly the same position in which we had been
in the morning.  Our only clue was the Professor's letter, and my
friend had made up his mind to start for Ardrossan next day, and to get
to the bottom of the anonymous letter, when a new development came to
alter our plans.

Very early on the following morning I was aroused from my sleep by a
tap upon my bedroom door.  It was a messenger with a note from Mortimer.

"Do come round," it said; "the matter is becoming more and more
extraordinary."

When I obeyed his summons I found him pacing excitedly up and down the
central room, while the old soldier who guarded the premises stood with
military stiffness in a corner.

"My dear Jackson," he cried, "I am so delighted that you have come, for
this is a most inexplicable business."

"What has happened, then?"

He waved his hand towards the case which contained the breastplate.

"Look at it," said he.

I did so, and could not restrain a cry of surprise.  The setting of the
middle row of precious stones had been profaned in the same manner as
the upper ones.  Of the twelve jewels eight had been now tampered with
in this singular fashion.  The setting of the lower four was neat and
smooth.  The others jagged and irregular.

"Have the stones been altered?" I asked.

"No, I am certain that these upper four are the same which the expert
pronounced to be genuine, for I observed yesterday that little
discoloration on the edge of the emerald.  Since they have not
extracted the upper stones, there is no reason to think the lower have
been transposed.  You say that you heard nothing, Simpson?"

"No, sir," the commissionaire answered.  "But when I made my round
after daylight I had a special look at these stones, and I saw at once
that someone had been meddling with them.  Then I called you, sir, and
told you.  I was backwards and forwards all night, and I never saw a
soul or heard a sound."

"Come up and have some breakfast with me," said Mortimer, and he took
me into his own chambers.--"Now, what DO you think of this, Jackson?"
he asked.

"It is the most objectless, futile, idiotic business that ever I heard
of.  It can only be the work of a monomaniac."

"Can you put forward any theory?"

A curious idea came into my head.  "This object is a Jewish relic of
great antiquity and sanctity," said I.  "How about the anti-Semitic
movement?  Could one conceive that a fanatic of that way of thinking
might desecrate----"

"No, no, no!" cried Mortimer.  "That will never do!  Such a man might
push his lunacy to the length of destroying a Jewish relic, but why on
earth should he nibble round every stone so carefully that he can only
do four stones in a night?  We must have a better solution than that,
and we must find it for ourselves, for I do not think that our
inspector is likely to help us.  First of all, what do you think of
Simpson, the porter?"

"Have you any reason to suspect him?"

"Only that he is the one person on the premises."

"But why should he indulge in such wanton destruction?  Nothing has
been taken away.  He has no motive."

"Mania?"

"No, I will swear to his sanity."

"Have you any other theory?"

"Well, yourself, for example.  You are not a somnambulist, by any
chance?"

"Nothing of the sort, I assure you."

"Then I give it up."

"But I don't--and I have a plan by which we will make it all clear."

"To visit Professor Andreas?"

"No, we shall find our solution nearer than Scotland.  I will tell you
what we shall do.  You know that skylight which overlooks the central
hall?  We will leave the electric lights in the hall, and we will keep
watch in the lumber-room, you and I, and solve the mystery for
ourselves.  If our mysterious visitor is doing four stones at a time,
he has four still to do, and there is every reason to think that he
will return tonight and complete the job."

"Excellent!" I cried.

"We will keep our own secret, and say nothing either to the police or
to Simpson.  Will you join me?"

"With the utmost pleasure," said I; and so it was agreed.

It was ten o'clock that night when I returned to the Belmore Street
Museum.  Mortimer was, as I could see, in a state of suppressed nervous
excitement, but it was still too early to begin our vigil, so we
remained for an hour or so in his chambers, discussing all the
possibilities of the singular business which we had met to solve.  At
last the roaring stream of hansom cabs and the rush of hurrying feet
became lower and more intermittent as the pleasure-seekers passed on
their way to their stations or their homes.  It was nearly twelve when
Mortimer led the way to the lumber-room which overlooked the central
hall of the museum.

He had visited it during the day, and had spread some sacking so that
we could lie at our ease, and look straight down into the museum.  The
skylight was of unfrosted glass, but was so covered with dust that it
would be impossible for anyone looking up from below to detect that he
was overlooked.  We cleared a small piece at each corner, which gave us
a complete view of the room beneath us.  In the cold white light of the
electric lamps everything stood out hard and clear, and I could see the
smallest detail of the contents of the various cases.

Such a vigil is an excellent lesson, since one has no choice but to
look hard at those objects which we usually pass with such half-hearted
interest.  Through my little peep hole I employed the hours in studying
every specimen, from the huge mummy-case which leaned against the wall
to those very jewels which had brought us there, gleaming and sparkling
in their glass case immediately beneath us.  There was much precious
gold-work and many valuable stones scattered through the numerous
cases, but those wonderful twelve which made up the urim and thummim
glowed and burned with a radiance which far eclipsed the others.  I
studied in turn the tomb-pictures of Sicara, the friezes from Karnak,
the statues of Memphis, and the inscriptions of Thebes, but my eyes
would always come back to that wonderful Jewish relic, and my mind to
the singular mystery which surrounded it.  I was lost in the thought of
it when my companion suddenly drew his breath sharply in, and seized my
arm in a convulsive grip.  At the same instant I saw what it was which
had excited him.

I have said that against the wall--on the right-hand side of the
doorway (the right-hand side as we looked at it, but the left as one
entered)--there stood a large mummy-case.  To our unutterable amazement
it was slowly opening.  Gradually, gradually the lid was swinging back,
and the black slit which marked the opening was becoming wider and
wider.  So gently and carefully was it done that the movement was
almost imperceptible.  Then, as we breathlessly watched it, a white
thin hand appeared at the opening, pushing back the painted lid, then
another hand, and finally a face--a face which was familiar to us both,
that of Professor Andreas.  Stealthily he slunk out of the mummy-case,
like a fox stealing from its burrow, his head turning incessantly to
left and to right, stepping, then pausing, then stepping again, the
very image of craft and of caution.  Once some sound in the street
struck him motionless, and he stood listening, with his ear turned,
ready to dart back to the shelter behind him.  Then he crept onwards
again upon tiptoe, very, very softly and slowly, until he had reached
the case in the centre of the room.  There he took a bunch of keys from
his pocket, unlocked the case, took out the Jewish breastplate, and,
laying it upon the glass in front of him, began to work upon it with
some sort of small, glistening tool.  He was so directly underneath us
that his bent head covered his work, but we could guess from the
movement of his hand that he was engaged in finishing the strange
disfigurement which he had begun.

I could realize from the heavy breathing of my companion, and the
twitchings of the hand which still clutched my wrist, the furious
indignation which filled his heart as he saw this vandalism in the
quarter of all others where he could least have expected it. He, the
very man who a fortnight before had reverently bent over this unique
relic, and who had impressed its antiquity and its sanctity upon us,
was now engaged in this outrageous profanation. It was impossible,
unthinkable--and yet there, in the white glare of the electric light
beneath us, was that dark figure with the bent grey head, and the
twitching elbow.  What inhuman hypocrisy, what hateful depth of malice
against his successor must underlie these sinister nocturnal labours.
It was painful to think of and dreadful to watch.  Even I, who had none
of the acute feelings of a virtuoso, could not bear to look on and see
this deliberate mutilation of so ancient a relic.  It was a relief to
me when my companion tugged at my sleeve as a signal that I was to
follow him as he softly crept out of the room.  It was not until we
were within his own quarters that he opened his lips, and then I saw by
his agitated face how deep was his consternation.

"The abominable Goth!" he cried.  "Could you have believed it?"

"It is amazing."

"He is a villain or a lunatic--one or the other.  We shall very soon
see which.  Come with me, Jackson, and we shall get to the bottom of
this black business."

A door opened out of the passage which was the private entrance from
his rooms into the museum.  This he opened softly with his key, having
first kicked off his shoes, an example which I followed.  We crept
together through room after room, until the large hall lay before us,
with that dark figure still stooping and working at the central case.
With an advance as cautious as his own we closed in upon him, but
softly as we went we could not take him entirely unawares.  We were
still a dozen yards from him when he looked round with a start, and
uttering a husky cry of terror, ran frantically down the museum.

"Simpson!  Simpson!" roared Mortimer, and far away down the vista of
electric lighted doors we saw the stiff figure of the old soldier
suddenly appear.  Professor Andreas saw him also, and stopped running,
with a gesture of despair.  At the same instant we each laid a hand
upon his shoulder.

"Yes, yes, gentlemen," he panted, "I will come with you.  To your room,
Mr. Ward Mortimer, if you please!  I feel that I owe you an
explanation."

My companion's indignation was so great that I could see that he dared
not trust himself to reply.  We walked on each side of the old
Professor, the astonished commissionaire bringing up the rear. When we
reached the violated case, Mortimer stopped and examined the
breastplate.  Already one of the stones of the lower row had had its
setting turned back in the same manner as the others.  My friend held
it up and glanced furiously at his prisoner.

"How could you!" he cried.  "How could you!"

"It is horrible--horrible!" said the Professor.  "I don't wonder at
your feelings.  Take me to your room."

"But this shall not be left exposed!" cried Mortimer.  He picked the
breastplate up and carried it tenderly in his hand, while I walked
beside the Professor, like a policeman with a malefactor.  We passed
into Mortimer's chambers, leaving the amazed old soldier to understand
matters as best he could.  The Professor sat down in Mortimer's
arm-chair, and turned so ghastly a colour that for the instant all our
resentment was changed to concern.  A stiff glass of brandy brought the
life back to him once more.

"There, I am better now!" said he.  "These last few days have been too
much for me.  I am convinced that I could not stand it any longer.  It
is a nightmare--a horrible nightmare--that I should be arrested as a
burglar in what has been for so long my own museum. And yet I cannot
blame you.  You could not have done otherwise.  My hope always was that
I should get it all over before I was detected.  This would have been
my last night's work."

"How did you get in?" asked Mortimer.

"By taking a very great liberty with your private door.  But the object
justified it.  The object justified everything.  You will not be angry
when you know everything--at least, you will not be angry with me.  I
had a key to your side door and also to the museum door.  I did not
give them up when I left.  And so you see it was not difficult for me
to let myself into the museum.  I used to come in early before the
crowd had cleared from the street. Then I hid myself in the mummy-case,
and took refuge there whenever Simpson came round.  I could always hear
him coming.  I used to leave in the same way as I came."

"You ran a risk."

"I had to."

"But why?  What on earth was your object--YOU to do a thing like that!"
Mortimer pointed reproachfully at the plate which lay before him on the
table.

"I could devise no other means.  I thought and thought, but there was
no alternate except a hideous public scandal, and a private sorrow
which would have clouded our lives.  I acted for the best, incredible
as it may seem to you, and I only ask your attention to enable me to
prove it."

"I will hear what you have to say before I take any further steps,"
said Mortimer, grimly.

"I am determined to hold back nothing, and to take you both completely
into my confidence.  I will leave it to your own generosity how far you
will use the facts with which I supply you."

"We have the essential facts already."

"And yet you understand nothing.  Let me go back to what passed a few
weeks ago, and I will make it all clear to you.  Believe me that what I
say is the absolute and exact truth.

"You have met the person who calls himself Captain Wilson.  I say
'calls himself' because I have reason now to believe that it is not his
correct name.  It would take me too long if I were to describe all the
means by which he obtained an introduction to me and ingratiated
himself into my friendship and the affection of my daughter.  He
brought letters from foreign colleagues which compelled me to show him
some attention.  And then, by his own attainments, which are
considerable, he succeeded in making himself a very welcome visitor at
my rooms.  When I learned that my daughter's affections had been gained
by him, I may have thought it premature, but I certainly was not
surprised, for he had a charm of manner and of conversation which would
have made him conspicuous in any society.

"He was much interested in Oriental antiquities, and his knowledge of
the subject justified his interest.  Often when he spent the evening
with us he would ask permission to go down into the museum and have an
opportunity of privately inspecting the various specimens.  You can
imagine that I, as an enthusiast, was in sympathy with such a request,
and that I felt no surprise at the constancy of his visits.  After his
actual engagement to Elise, there was hardly an evening which he did
not pass with us, and an hour or two were generally devoted to the
museum.  He had the free run of the place, and when I have been away
for the evening I had no objection to his doing whatever he wished
here.  This state of things was only terminated by the fact of my
resignation of my official duties and my retirement to Norwood, where I
hoped to have the leisure to write a considerable work which I had
planned.

"It was immediately after this--within a week or so--that I first
realized the true nature and character of the man whom I had so
imprudently introduced into my family.  The discovery came to me
through letters from my friends abroad, which showed me that his
introductions to me had been forgeries.  Aghast at the revelation, I
asked myself what motive this man could originally have had in
practising this elaborate deception upon me.  I was too poor a man for
any fortune-hunter to have marked me down.  Why, then, had he come?  I
remembered that some of the most precious gems in Europe had been under
my charge, and I remembered also the ingenious excuses by which this
man had made himself familiar with the cases in which they were kept.
He was a rascal who was planning some gigantic robbery.  How could I,
without striking my own daughter, who was infatuated about him, prevent
him from carrying out any plan which he might have formed?  My device
was a clumsy one, and yet I could think of nothing more effective.  If
I had written a letter under my own name, you would naturally have
turned to me for details which I did not wish to give.  I resorted to
an anonymous letter, begging you to be upon your guard.

"I may tell you that my change from Belmore Street to Norwood had not
affected the visits of this man, who had, I believe, a real and
overpowering affection for my daughter.  As to her, I could not have
believed that any woman could be so completely under the influence of a
man as she was.  His stronger nature seemed to entirely dominate her.
I had not realized how far this was the case, or the extent of the
confidence which existed between them, until that very evening when his
true character for the first time was made clear to me.  I had given
orders that when he called he should be shown into my study instead of
to the drawing-room. There I told him bluntly that I knew all about
him, that I had taken steps to defeat his designs, and that neither I
nor my daughter desired ever to see him again.  I added that I thanked
God that I had found him out before he had time to harm those precious
objects which it had been the work of my life-time to protect.

"He was certainly a man of iron nerve.  He took my remarks without a
sign either of surprise or of defiance, but listened gravely and
attentively until I had finished.  Then he walked across the room
without a word and struck the bell.

"'Ask Miss Andreas to be so kind as to step this way,' said he to the
servant.

"My daughter entered, and the man closed the door behind her. Then he
took her hand in his.

"'Elise,' said he, 'your father has just discovered that I am a
villain.  He knows now what you knew before.'

"She stood in silence, listening.

"'He says that we are to part for ever,' said he.

"She did not withdraw her hand.

"'Will you be true to me, or will you remove the last good influence
which is ever likely to come into my life?'

"'John,' she cried, passionately.  'I will never abandon you! Never,
never, not if the whole world were against you.'

"In vain I argued and pleaded with her.  It was absolutely useless.
Her whole life was bound up in this man before me.  My daughter,
gentlemen, is all that I have left to love, and it filled me with agony
when I saw how powerless I was to save her from her ruin.  My
helplessness seemed to touch this man who was the cause of my trouble.

"'It may not be as bad as you think, sir,' said he, in his quiet,
inflexible way.  'I love Elise with a love which is strong enough to
rescue even one who has such a record as I have.  It was but yesterday
that I promised her that never again in my whole life would I do a
thing of which she should be ashamed.  I have made up my mind to it,
and never yet did I make up my mind to a thing which I did not do.'

"He spoke with an air which carried conviction with it.  As he
concluded he put his hand into his pocket and he drew out a small
cardboard box.

"'I am about to give you a proof of my determination,' said he. 'This,
Elise, shall be the first-fruits of your redeeming influence over me.
You are right, sir, in thinking that I had designs upon the jewels in
your possession.  Such ventures have had a charm for me, which depended
as much upon the risk run as upon the value of the prize.  Those famous
and antique stones of the Jewish priest were a challenge to my daring
and my ingenuity.  I determined to get them.'

"'I guessed as much.'

"'There was only one thing that you did not guess.'

"'And what is that?'

"'That I got them.  They are in this box.'

"He opened the box, and tilted out the contents upon the corner of my
desk.  My hair rose and my flesh grew cold as I looked. There were
twelve magnificent square stones engraved with mystical characters.
There could be no doubt that they were the jewels of the urim and
thummim.

"'Good God!' I cried.  'How have you escaped discovery?'

"'By the substitution of twelve others, made especially to my order, in
which the originals are so carefully imitated that I defy the eye to
detect the difference.'

"'Then the present stones are false?' I cried.

"'They have been for some weeks.'

"We all stood in silence, my daughter white with emotion, but still
holding this man by the hand.

"'You see what I am capable of, Elise,' said he.

"'I see that you are capable of repentance and restitution,' she
answered.

"'Yes, thanks to your influence!  I leave the stones in your hands,
sir.  Do what you like about it.  But remember that whatever you do
against me, is done against the future husband of your only daughter.
You will hear from me soon again, Elise.  It is the last time that I
will ever cause pain to your tender heart,' and with these words he
left both the room and the house.

"My position was a dreadful one.  Here I was with these precious relics
in my possession, and how could I return them without a scandal and an
exposure?  I knew the depth of my daughter's nature too well to suppose
that I would ever be able to detach her from this man now that she had
entirely given him her heart.  I was not even sure how far it was right
to detach her if she had such an ameliorating influence over him.  How
could I expose him without injuring her--and how far was I justified in
exposing him when he had voluntarily put himself into my power?  I
thought and thought until at last I formed a resolution which may seem
to you to be a foolish one, and yet, if I had to do it again, I believe
it would be the best course open to me.

"My idea was to return the stones without anyone being the wiser.  With
my keys I could get into the museum at any time, and I was confident
that I could avoid Simpson, whose hours and methods were familiar to
me.  I determined to take no one into my confidence--not even my
daughter--whom I told that I was about to visit my brother in Scotland.
I wanted a free hand for a few nights, without inquiry as to my comings
and goings.  To this end I took a room in Harding Street that very
night, with an intimation that I was a Pressman, and that I should keep
very late hours.

"That night I made my way into the museum, and I replaced four of the
stones.  It was hard work, and took me all night.  When Simpson came
round I always heard his footsteps, and concealed myself in the
mummy-case.  I had some knowledge of gold-work, but was far less
skilful than the thief had been.  He had replaced the setting so
exactly that I defy anyone to see the difference.  My work was rude and
clumsy.  However, I hoped that the plate might not be carefully
examined, or the roughness of the setting observed, until my task was
done.  Next night I replaced four more stones.  And tonight I should
have finished my task had it not been for the unfortunate circumstance
which has caused me to reveal so much which I should have wished to
keep concealed.  I appeal to you, gentlemen, to your sense of honour
and of compassion, whether what I have told you should go any farther
or not.  My own happiness, my daughter's future, the hopes of this
man's regeneration, all depend upon your decision.

"Which is," said my friend, "that all is well that ends well and that
the whole matter ends here and at once.  Tomorrow the loose settings
shall be tightened by an expert goldsmith, and so passes the greatest
danger to which, since the destruction of the Temple, the urim and
thummim has been exposed.  Here is my hand, Professor Andreas, and I
can only hope that under such difficult circumstances I should have
carried myself as unselfishly and as well."

Just one footnote to this narrative.  Within a month Elise Andreas was
married to a man whose name, had I the indiscretion to mention it,
would appeal to my readers as one who is now widely and deservedly
honoured.  But if the truth were known that honour is due not to him,
but to the gentle girl who plucked him back when he had gone so far
down that dark road along which few return.